One of the things I really found striking about Tammy is like she did a very detailed picture of my daughter's surgical wound
And that's not an easy thing to look at right because you don't want to look at that
But that also ties in with the ideas we've been discussing about well
I think that's the with the mystery. Yes mystery of the crucifix. You bet right
Yeah, all these images that we have like the beauty of Christ wounds all these things which sound so completely
Pathological yeah to many people if you can understand them properly
You can understand that that you have to gaze on that which most threatens
So, hello everyone, I'm pleased here pleased today to have with me
Jonathan Pazio and John Verveke
People that most of you many of you not all of you will be familiar with I
I've been working on a new book
entitled we who wrestle with God and it's been influenced by
Jonathan's ideas and
John's ideas and I
Developed an argument in part as a consequence of the public lectures. I've been doing for the last three months trying to push my ideas farther and I
I I
Put forward a set of
Propositions that I'm basing one of the book chapters on I wrote it as an outline and then I think it's solid
I've been testing it when I've been speaking at universities as well to diverse audiences of specialists
To see if they'll object to it because I think it's actually quite radical and I sent this group of
Propositions or this list of propositions to Jonathan and John a month ago about and we've been going back and forth
And I thought I heard Jonathan was coming to town to do a talk with John and I thought hey
that's a good opportunity we could get together and
Walk through these propositions because I'd like to see if if they're solid because if they're solid
Well, that's good
And if they're not I'd like to find out and so we're gonna do this a little different
This is gonna be a little different than many of the conversations
I've had because it'll have a bit more structure and I I want to read the propositions
There's I think about 15 of them and I want Jonathan and and John to
Comment on them to
Tell me where they agree to tell me where they disagree
Tell me what they don't understand and to see if I can well learn something as a consequence
That's kind of the whole and so we'll start with this first proposition
To see the world
We must must
Prioritize our perceptions
so
John I'll ask you about that first because that's a particular I believe a particular focus of yours
I don't think that's an exaggeration. No, it's not. That's that's that's the core of my work
and so
the main
Way I would respond to this is I would say
I think the work that's coming out from artificial intelligence and the work that's coming out from attention
Lines up with this very well. I don't have any significant disagreement with that proposition
And and the must part of it as well
So the must I took well, let me tell you how I took yes, yeah
And I took it as what's called constitutive necessity
I took it to be if you are going to be a cognitive agent
Then you must do this. I didn't take it to be a metaphysical
Necessity I took it to be that kind of constituent necessity
I think it's useful to start with what you described as constituent necessities before you move into the realm of metaphysical
Exactly, I think that's a good way to argue you should all right and so I think and I'm not going to
Recapitulate all these arguments, but a lot of work. I think zero is in on the idea
That the core of what makes us intelligent and the thing that we're finding difficult to give to machines to make them
Artificially general intelligence is a process. I call relevance realization, which is exactly I think lines up with this very well
The amount of information available to you in the world is astronomically vast all the things you could pay attention to
The amount of information in your long-term memory
Especially if you think of all the ways it could be combined is also
Astronomically the number of options of potential lines of behavior. I could move this finger this finger
I could move them like a lift like you and the ways I can move around that's combinatorial
Explosion all of it all of it and then right and then you can also consider
You know all of the options of different pit of potential worlds
You might want to consider trying to produce or moving into right and so the point is in many different dimensions
We face combinatorial explosion and what's
What you can't do and this is where it lines up with the most because we're finite beings
Yes, the finite resources and finite time is you can't check all of that information
So you can't go and say no, that's not relevant. That's not relevant that memory is not relevant
That will take like that's the the rest of the history of the universe right right, so so we don't know how we do it
In fact because of that in part. Well, I mean, I think
I think there's getting some clues towards it, but we can talk about that later. Okay, right?
So the must and the prioritization on the perception side you're fine with it has to be it has to be and here
But here's the tricky thing which is
The fact that we can't check it means and this sounds almost like a Zen coin is the prioritization is odd
when you say it sort of like
Primaficia, yeah, because it means we intelligently ignore
Most of the information right prioritizing the what I want to put yeah, that's a good codicilies
So you're saying that you don't want to misinterpret the necessity for prioritization as our as something like
The necessity or our ability to make a numbered list of exactly number of possibilities that lay out in front of us
Because that's actually impossible right so so that isn't how we do it. However, we do it isn't that exactly so when you when when if
If you're okay with that reading and it sounds like you are
Prioritization doesn't mean what we normally mean by prioritization where we set things out
Explicit and focal and then choose right great. It's implicit. It's implicit and it's self-organizing and our ability to think and it's unconscious
Yes emerges out of it
We can influence it top down but because it is an absolute requirement for our cognition
I would argue that our ability to do anything that we do consciously is ultimately dependent on it and right
Okay, fine. So that's good Jonathan. Well, I think the only thing that I would add is
You have to phrase it in a certain way. There's no you have to have a sense
But there's a sense in with perception
When we say we must prioritize our perceptions
I I think the best way to understand is that perception is already prioritization
It is to in order to perceive
That has to be a hierarchy in itself the perception is in and of itself
it an act of
Implicit prioritization
And to use the word implicit will be a good idea
So to avoid the idea that we are consciously doing it that in order to even perceive the world there already has to be
a given hierarchy that is
That is making you able to focus on anything because yeah, or else we would be lost in a in a way as you know
A sea of infinite details
Okay, so I think that's a good cortisol. And so we could also make a little technical case here quickly
So part of the problem that John John referred to is that
In some sense, it's the problem of the finite confronting the infinite
And so we could make a neurological argument for that
So for example when you move your eyes around or when they move around as a consequence of being directed by unconscious
Structures of prioritization because that happens all the time
You move your eyes around because you want to direct the high resolution part of your visual system to whatever you're attending to
That's the fovea and the fovea is a very small part of your retina and
It's a very high resolution part
So each cell in the fovea is connected at the level of the primary visual cortex
To 10,000 cells and then each of those have 10,000 connections
And so if your whole vision was foveal in its
Um in its resolution you'd have to have a skull like an alien to contain that much brain
And so so so and that's a real indication of that finitude right is that you do have
limited cognitive resources and limited means
Practically and physically limited, but it also means
Metabolically limited the the cost of running your brain is already extremely high
and
And so you're going to shepherd your available
attentional resources because they are finite and and they're finite in no small part because they are technically
metabolically
Costly that all seems okay
So I would add one thing to that which is I would put an emphasis on how this process has to be self-organizing
because we want to avoid
A perennial problem, which you and I both know shows up in psychology
Which is to posit the internal homunculus
That actually doesn't explain the problem, but just shifts the central executive is an example of this etc
So we don't we we don't want to say that there's someone that's doing the prioritization because that someone is just as mysterious
Right and is facing the very problem that we're trying to explain. So yeah, right the process has to be dynamically so far
Well, one of the ways I
realized
How that problem works is in an attempt to solve the mind-body problem because you can't solve the mind-body problem
But you can say let's say you're you want to
Explore an idea and you decide to do that by writing an essay
So then you sit down in front of the computer, which is not an idea
It's actually that you're sitting and then you move your fingers on the keyboard
And so there's a hierarchy of transformation from mind which might be the abstract intent to body
And so and so that the spirit hits the body in the finger movements
And then the spirit disappears in some sense under the finger movements because you can move your fingers voluntarily
But you have no idea what muscles you're moving to do that and you can't control the cells or anything like that
Oh, I did that with my students in the lecture this morning. I was talking about
This very fact that I said, uh, put up your finger
Okay, bend your finger. What do you do to bend your finger? Right exactly. Exactly. It's so interesting
It's so interesting that you have that level of consciousness at that level of detail, which is pretty detailed
But no more than that. Yes. Yes. Yeah. So that's a mystery man that that that that localization of consciousness
Between the body and part of the spirit. There's like a there's like a what would you call it? Uh
There's a bandwidth. There's a bandwidth of resolution for consciousness. Yes
And why that band see the social psychologists who studied language are caught into this because one of the things they realized was that
Short words first of all short words tend to be old words
So because as language develops words that are used a lot get more efficient
But the short words also map extraordinarily well onto the self evident level of perception
and so for example a short word is cat because
A cat presents itself
For some reason to our perception the species cat doesn't and the
The fur of the cat in some sense doesn't it's the cat. Yes, and and you can see that
Primary object record level recognition basic level basic level. That's right. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. And so you see that with
Babies because they get
Doggy pretty damn fast and that that's because the language maps on to the primary domain of perception that basic level perception
Quite nicely and that is associated with something like the natural
Bandwidth of consciousness. Yeah, I would I would say that that lines up with if you rush his explanation
Is you know, you're getting the best trade-off between differences between category and similarities within categories, right?
And then the question is what this best trade-off means exactly and that's and for me that's that's what that would that be a little bit of
I guess a nuance I'd want to put on to
The prioritization because the prioritization sounds
very but sort of like an imposition
Whereas I think what we're talking about is something more like what maro ponte talked about when he talked about optimal gripping
Right. So what's what's the correct?
You know distance to look at this
Well, it depends because if I zoom in I lose the gestalt if I zoom out I lose the detail that depends on what you want to do
Exactly. Well, that's it. That's why I'm kind of attracted to pragmatism
It's like well to some degree our theories of truth need to be embedded in the practicalities of action
And so is that a grippable object that I can drink from while I want my perception to match that problem
Yeah, but it doesn't I think that it if you understand that the prioritization
The thing that you have heaven and earth. I'm going to use sorry. I'm going to use mythical categories. But so you have
You have heaven and earth and that
It's the way in which heaven meets earth is a it's a mutual relationship, right?
We always see it as a relationship of lovers you could say
But it's not the the prioritization isn't just about an imposition from above
But it's about the manner in which that which is above let's say the
The hierarchy is able to encounter the potential on which it's we were talking about that last night
So jonathan made this funny joke last night. We were talking about sam harris and sam harris has this
Uh line of argumentation
Where and he used this on me where I interpreted a biblical story and then he interpreted a recipe
Yes, and he said well look at all the interpretations and that is a problem of
Of semiotic drift. Yes. Well, it's also a problem of this horizon of infinite possibility. There are multiple interpretive schemes
So jonathan said he'd like to do a video
Where he shows that a recipe is actually necessarily embedded inside a mythological framework
And we started to talk about that because imagine
Well, the recipe implies
That you need to make an edible meal that you want to make an edible meal that you're going to serve it to family
And friends that that's part of a kind of communion that you think that's a good thing
That's worth spending time on that serves your family and friends
That's maybe nested in something like an ethic of service to the community
Like there's a whole there's a whole network of purpose
I would add more to that
There's all kinds of implicit assumptions that I can capture in a sequence of propositions
Procedural skills that are not completely capturable in words and that those procedures and skills can also map on
Through the particular virtues and skill
You know that that people are bringing to like
it's like
Most things can't be solved by a recipe and right right and yet so a recipe is a
significant cognitive cultural achievement and we don't recognize like and and and
We we we we tend to over generalize the things we think for which we can provide recipes. This is one of the right
That's an algorithm issue. Yes, exactly. Exactly. And so there's lots
Yeah, even in the recipe itself
You will notice that the way in which we name things and the way in which we order things will be related to a normal
prioritization hierarchy prioritization
But if you're making chicken you'll have the chicken and then you'll have the spices
And you'll understand that these elements that i'm adding are spices and that they're there
Let's say something like a marginalia that i'm adding to the central meal
It's actually the very it's like it's the pattern of a church actually, you know where you have
A movement towards the central identity that we understand and then we have
The way in which it's complemented to other things and so even the actual recipe itself is like a little
Microphone and also the judgment you use is like well, how much spice well the answer is
Well, what function is this spice going to serve and you say well
I want to add a little zest and interest
To my cooking and so then you have a philosophy of zest and interest that's associated with that because
Just predictable chicken isn't good enough
And maybe you want to put a little more spice on because you want to uh, what would you say you want to
Challenge your guests a little bit in an interesting way and you're thinking this all through and for the same reason
You'd wear funny socks or a tie that has just a little bit too much on it, you know
Well, it seems I mean that's actually the future of general problem solving
Like you when people are solving a problem, especially if they might get the wrong frame
Moderately distracting you from the central concern is an optimal way. Yeah, exactly. You need to do that
So so what I'm hearing both of you say is the prioritization is really a multi-dimensional optimal gripping
That's right. That's right. We're concentrating on okay. Well, then that we can also expand on that to some degree because
multi-dimensional and optimal
Brings a lot of other concerns into it. So imagine that one of the principles and and can't can't
Move towards this with this theory of universal ethic in some sense, although I think it
You know I hesitate to criticize can't because but
I think that there's a deeper explanation for what he observes is well, how should I treat you?
Well, that's a complex question. But one of the constraints is well
What if we meet a hundred times?
So we're going to establish an actual relationship. So however, I conduct myself in the present moment
has to
Be in accordance with a value hierarchy that takes into account the desirability of our mutual
Interrelationship into the future and that produces a very serious series of I would say
Often intrinsic constraints. So I can't be too insulting. I can't be too unwelcoming
I have to offer you something approximating a true reciprocity for the thing not to degenerate
And so and all of that and I would say that also governs how you cook for someone if you actually want to make friends
So it's like treat other people as you would like them to treat you
And it's pretty funny that that's the intrinsic ethic in a recipe. And so that's a good that's a that's such a funny argument
We'll get right back to Jonathan Peugeot and John Verbecki in just a moment
First we'd like to tell you about Elysium health founded by Dr. Leonard Garante a renowned mit researcher and 30 year student of the science of aging
Elysium health is on a mission to translate critical scientific advancements in aging research into accessible health products
And technologies their flagship product basis replenishes youthful levels of nad plus
Activating what scientists call our longevity genes to promote healthy aging and keep you feeling younger longer
Many customers report benefits such as sustained maintained energy levels less general tiredness and fatigue
More satisfying workouts and support in recovery from workouts healthy skin and general health and wellness
Matter Elysium's brain aging supplement was developed in partnership with the university of oxford
Matter does what no other product does it slows the shrinking of our brains
For most of us brain shrinkage begins in our 30s and impacts memory learning and even physical activity
Lifestyle factors such as alcohol consumption smoking and poor sleep habits accelerate this process
Matter is patented and clinically proven to slow the age related loss in the brain's memory centers by an average of 86
Percent many matter customers have reported improvements in memory and cognition go to explore matter.com slash jordan
An enter code jbp 10 at checkout to save 10 percent off matter prepaid subscriptions as well as other Elysium health supplements
Okay, so let's move to the second
presupposition
To act in the world
So it's kind of a corollary or the first or something equivalent to act in the world. We must prioritize our actions
I don't think we probably have to cover that right because it's
Perception is an action already because you have to move your eyes and orient your head and also gripping is an action
Yes, exactly. So I think that goes with it. Yeah, okay. So so we'll leave that well, okay
Now this is the next this is a nice switch. I think any system of priorities
Is a structure of values and then I sneak something in an ethic. So I'm kind of defining ethic as a
Something approximating perhaps an internally. It's like a game. It's an internally consistent
Hierarchy of value, but it's also it's going to have to be iterable in the sense that we already discussed
So that's kind of what I'm defining an ethic as and then you could also think of it as something that's embodied
So when you're watching someone on a screen in a movie say a character, they embody an ethic
That's what makes them interesting. It's a whole structure of value
And they're acting it out and it's a system of priorities of perception and action
And that's a value structure. The reason it's a value structure is because well, what's the difference between
prioritization and value
You you prioritize what you value and so I think the difficulty I have is if you use the word ethic because the word ethic is so
charged with
Morality and also
To the way that we're supposed to act between each other
Then I think it it can be a little bit misleading because values and why is good
It seems to well, I think good is fine. That is the good in the sense that there's also a good glass
Which has no moral bearing at all. There's a there's a good way to walk down the hall
Which is not a moral question. There's a you know, they're good way to fish, but these are not ethical ethical
Maybe they are maybe yeah, maybe but I think that that's maybe the little place where I would wonder about
Yeah, so that that's a terminological problem in some sense, right? Well, it is
I don't know. What do you think that it seems that the word ethic seems to imply interpersonal relationships
Yeah, the word ethic has been reduced to the the moral interactions ethical. Yes. Yes, whereas
Typically philosophers will use the term normativity to be a much more general term for cover for the idea that there's a governing principle
for your behavior
Okay, so I I'll have to make sure I clarified that when I read about this
But I was also thinking about, you know common fictional tropes in popular culture. So
If you're watching a mafia
Movie one of the things that's interesting about a mafia criminal as opposed to just your ordinary criminal is
That he's not entirely chaotic
Right. He abides by the mafia code. So he's loyal to his
Yeah, he's loyal to a code. So it makes him a quasi-ethic actor and I would say well the mafia
Character does embody an ethic and I'm kind of struggling for a word that isn't ethic
You might disagree with the ethical but I think it's because I mean
I think you can actually take this a lot further than than just a mafia person
I think there's a way that you can be a good mass murderer
that in the sense that you can you can
You have discovered the hierarchy of values things you need to value in order to become a good mass murderer
And now you're engaging in them towards that
Hierarchy of values. There is like you could say like there are satanic hierarchies like the
Columbine killers, for example, we're doing exactly that and most of the mass shooters
There's a contest going on. Yeah, they know about each other
They're often in fact one of them one kid who was planning to do this wrote me like six months ago
He had a 50 page manifesto ready and the weapons and he watched this this youtube video
Discussion I did with Warren Farrell and where we touched on this issue
And he decided that there was seriously something wrong with him and that he should get some help and not do this
But he was in contact with one of the people who went out and shot up a high school
They'd been contact online. So he was like that far away from it. Yeah, but that's so so there is this
It's not a
You can have a chaotic criminal who's completely unpredictable, but then you don't have much of a plot, right?
He's not an interesting character. He's gonna get caught really fast. Well, there's that too, right?
The far more interesting ones have a they haven't well, I'd say they have an ethic now
It's not an ethical ethic, right?
So that's why the word ethic is difficult because you could say that ultimately what you're gonna what's gonna happen is that there will be
A hierarchy of value systems. Yeah, we'll be more related to the good in the in the classical sense that is played out
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Exactly. And this is Plato's argument that nobody willingly does evil
Everybody does what they conceive to be a good in some fact
Yeah, you see that in Dante you see the same is whole movement. He even talks about how the people inhale everybody is there because of
I'm reading the divine comedy right now. That's wonderful. Yeah, that's great
Everybody who is there is there because of love
For a good even though even if they love the good too much or they're mistaken about
Let's say the actual ultimate value of that good
Everybody moves towards a good even if you're doing something which is completely reprehensible
Yeah, the proposal that sin is actually failing to love wisely. Yeah, that's the don't you see that I have
I have some problem with that viewpoint because I think I think that happens
I do think that happens and I think many of the
You know, I've talked to people like my friend Greg Hurwitz who writes thrillers and he crafts pretty evil characters
And we've talked about that a lot
An evil character with an ethic so like a misplaced love is is a very interesting character
But then there's the other sorts of characters that are more cane like because cane
His spirit that the spirit that's expressed in that story
his
He isn't aiming at something that's good. He's aiming at
Getting away with lying to god. He's aiming at getting away with making
Insufficient sacrifices. He's aiming at getting away eventually with murder
It's not a perversion of the good and I think that we underestimate the problem of evil if we assume
That it's merely a consequence of worshiping false idols say because the idol can be so
It's like I talked to you last night about the reports that michelle fuko rape boys in graveyards. It's like
okay
He argued even formally
Culturally to abolish or at least radically reduce the age of consent and a lot of intellectuals went along with them
And maybe you can have a discussion about that and what the age of consent could be and maybe you can't
there's room for differences in opinion there, but
When your pedophilia involves graveyard sex
Then that's not a misplaced good
Like that's that's that's but why not george. Why why isn't that
Pleasure is a good
Right and and well, it's so specific
You know, why the graveyard like there's something so dark
I don't think there's I think that's a place that's so dark that you can't go there without knowing that it's dark
And I do think that I really do believe and you know
I've done my best to study the thought of people who've done truly reprehensible things is that there's a level of
Reprehensibility where you are going there to cause the most trouble you can't and I don't see
If there's any good left in that it's such a tiny really gonna be like that
I'm really gonna be the devil's advocate here knowing that
There are some that do it better than others and some that don't do it as well
Even recognizing that the good that they're aiming towards is is not really transcendentally
Their memory has to be working their problems
Right, that is that they that it's like if I yeah, so they're still driven by a coherent spirit
Well, that's what I think the spirit of lucifer and this and the spirit of girth is
Mephistopheles that's that's and the spirit of cane. That's a description of that ethic
It does you know it is it is a coherent personality
And that's why there's so much well and Milton as well
It's it's there's been an attempt to delineate the ethic of evil and and it's not merely chaotic
And the reason one of the reasons why it's important and maybe it's hard to
To see that right away, but one of the reasons why it's important
At least I find it important to formulate it this way the way the Dante formulated it or that Plato
Formulated it is that if you don't go in this direction
You end up with a dualism and then they end up acting as like two opposites
Whereas there's the the more platonic way of setting it up what ends up happening is that
The evil always ends up just being a perversion of the good right is parasitic
It's always parasitic and so what what it does is that it makes the good truly good and it makes it all pervasive
And a way in which it can actually fill up the entire
Cosmos, you know the this idea that even in the death of hell the love of god is there
Like you see that in a lot of the christian mystic that there is no place that is
Okay, so let me ask you about that on the grounds of christian theology
So and I'm probably going to mangle this and so correct me
Well, there's an idea that in the book of revelation that christ is the eternal judge
but that he's also a judge who comes back at the end of days and
Separates the wheat from the chaff the damned from the saved and the implication in that
book is that
Many are called but few are chosen the judgment's pretty damn harsh and most
Most what most spirits are damned most people are damned and then is that eternal or is there a
reconciliation and so I don't know the answer to that so the
Christian
The best way
This is gonna
This is the type of thing that could actually get me in trouble
But like the best way to formulate it
I think that we're seeing in the orthodox tradition right now is to say that we live in the hope of
Of a final restoration
But that we cannot universal redemption, but we cannot posit it because
You like you said there are seems to be there seem to be two traditions in the christian world
There is a tradition of final restoration which you find in revelation as well
By the way, because it says the last thing to die is death itself right there
There's the sense of death is thrown into the fire
And so the last what exactly is that referring to the the sense in which the heavenly druslim descends and embodies
Fills up the entire world. So you have these images and then you also have an image of evil being completely
Let's say cast off and those two kind of exist in a
Yeah, well, it's it's I was thinking this about just the other day when I was thinking about making a video address to
Do the islamic world as preposterous as that might sound
Because one of the things you want to do when you're talking to people is you want to distinguish between
them as of intrinsic value and redeemable in some final sense just as you are and
Ideas that might be possessing them that have either this misplaced good element to them or this vengeful element and so
You know, you don't want to throw to use a horrible cliche
You don't want to throw the baby out with the bath water
And so maybe the separation of the wheat from the chaff is
A spiritual discrimination that doesn't throw out the entire
Being along with the judgment you understand it fractally then I think that that makes sense
If you read like for example, c.s. Lewis is a great example of someone who kind of was going in that direction
Was hinting at some things he talked about how like the this notion that the key to hell is hell is locked from the inside
right
No matter even like I think c.s. Lewis said like even in the depth of in the depth of hell if satan wanted
To repent there's well that's what Milton said but that's not but that's not it's like it's not happening because that's the role
That's in the story. This is the character that helped me understand this
part of
The cosmos that or the part of the way that the world is laying itself out and you see that
In in in some of the syrian fathers for example said that from the syrian
He he says things like that where he says there's the the fire in hell is the same fire that was at pentacos
The fire in hell is the love of god
And it's and it's and it's it's only that to the extent that you refuse to be transformed
Yeah, and you hold on to your let's say
Parasitic good that is what the fire hell well right well part of that is is that as you become more divorced from
Let's say what constitutes a sustainable and valid good the farther you get away from that
Whether it's merely by pursuing a misplaced good or it's by conscious design
the more that
Elevates itself up as the harshest possible judge that will do the most damage to your current ethic and then
destabilize your whole perceptions and so
That's so interesting because as you deviate
Speaking spiritually as you deviate from god
He becomes more
tyrannical in in some sense to you and more judgmental and it's also partly because this is why the catholic
idea of confession is isn't what's often pilloried because you know people laugh
Well, you're a catholic you can sin your whole life and on your deathbed you can repent. It's like yeah, but you have to
Face the magnitude of everything you did wrong
So repentance isn't just well. I'm sorry. It's like you're actually sorry
And if you've stacked up a whole lifetime of a lifetime of sins
What makes you think that you're going to have the moral wherewithal on your deathbed to confront that without anything
Well, it's just absolute existential terror is so it's there's no easy out from that so
So
I mean, I thought the discussion was
um important um and and what you just said jordan is important I I
I I for I for one who would not look want immortality because when I look back at the foolishness and
And the vices of my past
um
Yeah, it's it's it's hard. It's and so
Um people who think they could just sort of sin and mouth. I don't mouth the repentance
I don't think that's well. They also think they can in some sense pull one over god
Yeah, but or we could we'll abide by this rule that will never use religious language week when we can use any other kind of language
No, no, no, I know I know you weren't objecting to that. I think it's a good principle. I'm happy. I'm happy to talk about it
I I I'll but I don't
um
Well, let me say
There's there's something underneath the religious discussion
That is sort of a central concern to me at this point. Um
And I'll invoke caught
Um caught right the three critiques
Right the critique of pure reason practical reason judgment, right and and and Habermas makes a great point of this
I'm coming to it. I'm coming to the point which is
We don't seem since caught we don't have an integrated normativity
We have three autonomous spheres of normativity
Around the true the epistemic
The good and the beautiful and what what what caught did and one of the problems of modernity and this is Habermas's point
Is he made a very strong case
For the autonomy of each right beauty is beauty. So that's partly why you objected in the way you did when you emailed me back
Exactly you I was talking about an ethic that would unite and you said well, it's differentiated true beautiful and good
Right my my response to that would be something like well, whatever god is
Fundamentally ineffable. So we'll we'll make that yeah, we'll make that clear to begin with
but
I would say that
One way of thinking about the way we think about god is that god is what's common to the good the true and the beautiful
So this gets us into the the the the discussion that I think is for me
sort of the deepest levels of the phenomenology
And the cognition which is I mean that
Jonathan would know this is the classical doctrine the classical way of putting this is the convertible of the
The the the transcendentals are convertible into each other
So somehow the true and the good and and and the beautiful are one but not mathematical identity
This is really important. It's not right you can write and so
And you know the coinus wrestles with this max. I've been reading maximus, but I think you see a reflection of that in the idea
The trinity too, of course, right and and and and so the issue there is
And I've been reading DC Schindler on the Catholicity of reason and he talks about this he gets it from baltazar
he talks about the primacy of
The primacy of beauty the centrality of goodness and the ultimacy of truth that that they they are superlative but in different ways
So what he means by that is there's a primacy to beauty and and this is a classic platonic argument
If you don't have beauty all the other normativities are not available to you, right?
so why right
I wrote a chapter in my last book on the necessity of beauty, but but I don't understand why that why prime why primary
Because and what does that say about our perception that it's primary and so right because you don't have to think about it
Is that part of it? Is that you apprehend it?
I don't understand well a way of thinking about it is
scarry wrote a really beautiful book called beauty and how it prepares us for truth and justice
And the idea so let let's let's let's take let's take something that's that's very culturally relevant
And I've something I've been talking about so we we are
We are immersed in what recur called a hermeneutics of suspicion
The hermeneutics of suspicion is that appearances are always distorting distracting deceiving us from reality
That's the hermeneutics of suspicion and the moment of truth is when you reveal
The hidden cabal the conspiracy, right? This is the hermeneutics of suspicion
And it's you know, and and and recur's point is we got this that's what Freud does
Freud and it's the uncovering
Here's what's really going on in the deconstruction is here's what's read exactly. It's everywhere now
Right. Okay. Now. Yeah. Yeah. Now. Here's marlapunty's point about this, right? His point is but wait
the hermeneutics
Of that the hermeneutics of suspicion is always dependent on this if I say that's unreal. Oh, look
I do that because I say that's real
Realization is always a comparative judgment. This is his point
So the and so does he accept the notion that there is something because one of the things you see in the post-modern types
And I was looking at Richard Rorty the work the other day
And he seems to buy the post-modern idea that
Everything is just a network of linguistic representation and that there is no real beyond that
That's that's Dylan's critique of that being similarly logical reductionism
All you do is transfer all the markers of reality onto properties of the text
And then you you you prevent the text from being subject to the very criticisms you're making of reality
Yeah, well that that that seems credible to me. Okay. So so so it was marlapunty accepts the reality of beauty
Exactly because think about what this means if the hermeneutics of suspicion is
Right that appearances distract us deceive us right there has to be something under that right and beauty is when appearances disclose reality
Yeah
That's the that's what I mean. That's what I believe that that's the artist
I mean that's the artist take or that's the liturgical take or it's the the beauty of an of a church or the beauty of an icon
or the it's it's the notion that
That that god or ultimate reality or however you want to phrase it is disclosing itself to us and that appears to us
as the connection between
That which we encounter these these patterned beings that we encounter and what they reveal to us about the other transcendentals
Well, when I wrote this chapter, which is my favorite chapter in both books
It's try to make one room in your house as beautiful as possible
And so this sort of step behind
Well order your room first so that it's just not cluttered and and idiotic and and
Running at counter purposes to whatever your purposes are a reflection of your internal chaos
Get it orderly, but that's not good enough. The next thing is see if you can make a relationship with beauty, which is really
It's it's really uh people are afraid of that a because I've watched people try to buy art and they're terrified of buying art
and the reason is is because
Their choice puts their taste on display
and if their taste is
undeveloped then their inability to distinguish between a false appearance and
The genuine reality of beauty is immediately revealed to people so they're terrified of it, but they're also equally
Terrified of beauty. So let me tell you a story about this if you don't mind
I I bought some russian impressionist paintings for my father
And I liked them a lot. I this particular artist
The russian impressionist style is like the french impressionist style except it's a lot rougher the brushstrokes are
Thicker and so it's lower resolution, but it's equally beautiful in terms of palette
And I have a variety of paintings if you get some distance from them
They just snap into representations so lovely
And so I sent my dad like eight of these paintings and my mom took one look at them and she said
Those are not coming out of the basement
And so and my mom is is a conservative person so she's not high in openness. She's not that interested in ideas
And she's not and her aesthetic sense isn't
Sophisticated now my mother has a lot of lovely attributes
But but and my dad and her differ in that and so I he loved these paintings and then he made these
frames for them and then he brought one up
And my mom tolerated that and then he brought another one up
And then she tolerated that and then like all eight of them eventually made it upstairs
And then a few years later I was there and she told me how much she loved the paintings
But it really they really set her off and I think it was partly because
well, if you're
Imagine you have you're you're comfortable in your canonical perceptions of objects in some sense
And then the impressionist come along and say, you know, you could look at that whole landscape as if it was nothing
But the interplay of color and that's we forget how radical that is
I mean
Those paintings caused riots in Paris when they were first showed impressionist paintings and that's what my mother was reacting to
It's like, oh my god, there's a whole different way of looking at the world
I don't want to see that and it's an invitation to
That which is beyond the triviality of your perceptions, let's say, but it's to think that there's nothing about that that's
Worth being frightened of or challenging
You don't understand conservatives if you don't see that
So but in terms of in terms of beauty
One of the things that also that especially now you can one of the the problems or the the way the beauty can kind of overwhelm us
Is that we feel as if if we give ourselves we we're afraid of the
The suspicion the hermeneutics of suspicion. We're afraid that if we we see reality discloses itself to us
And we can see the connection between that which is appearing to me and some
Something behind it and I'm afraid that if I jump if I make that leap
Then I'll be betrayed or all that or that it will right that it won't turn out to be real or well
Sometimes it sometimes it's not like some there are there is it is possible to to be tricked by
By appearance and this gets you to to haunt
You know saving beauty his critique of what you see going on right now
Is he he he argues if you read ancient texts if you read platinus one of the features they'll say
About beauty is it striking and disturbing and disrupting?
Right. I'll I want to come back to that about the the transformative aspect of truth
But but right the transformative theory of truth
But and hawn talks about now what we've done right and he talks about in other books too
Is we've reduced we try to reduce the beautiful to the smooth
Which is the the ease at which we can consume something
Like the smooth out of cover of a car exactly right one pixel resolution. Yes. Yes
And and and because
Because what that does is it gives you and I'll use this word deliberately the veneer
Of beauty with but while protecting you from the hermetic suspicion
Yeah, right you see that so what we do is and then he says in pornography
Is the primary example of that because what you do is you remove all threat all mystery all otherness
Of from the person so there's no way they can strike you or disturb you. There's no way to reject you. Yeah, right
Yes, exactly. And the and so pornography is an example of
Of the smooth completely overtaking the beautiful and being misunderstood
as beautiful
But if that's if you if you gentlemen are in agreement with that what that means
That's my answer to why the primacy of beauty because if you do not get that ability
To and I want to use this word
Sorry, please go ahead then I'll ask. Yeah, I I want to say through the way I'm saying like through my glasses
Beyond and by means of if we can't properly get a moment where we can see through appearance into reality
We are locked
Into solipsism and skepticism
You need a primary and if you do it if you do it rather than it is called to you then you are trapped
But you need you need something that calls you from beyond appearances
So that you can properly align appearances to reality and you realize
That's why the primacy. So is that the ontological calling you out of epistemology?
I would argue that that's Plato's argument for what how the beauty how so when you say, okay, so
I I've thought thought a lot about the relationship between love and truth
And I think love is primary and the truth is the handmaiden of love in some sense
But but so there's a primacy there. I would say the primacy of love
But you're making an argument for the primacy of beauty. And so are they contradictory?
no, no, no, no not at all because
Plato's
View of love and you have to be careful because Plato is taking the greek notion of eros
And he's trying to bend it
And I think he's trying to bend it towards what the christians are going to eventually talk about in agape
Right. Okay. So take that as a caveat on what I'm saying
But nevertheless, what's going on, right is Plato says no, no, no
What love is is that you are called
to beauty
And let me let me let me let me let me just try and show you give me a sec because there's a connection
Yeah, okay. So a lot this will sound like where's he took out of left field but like
truth rationality
Most of the cognitive biases
In fact, there's a growing argument that a lot of the cognitive biases confirmation bias, blah, blah, blah
A lot of them are actually
versions aspects of the myside bias
Uh, egocentrism. I won't make that argument here. I think it's a good argument
But let's say even if it's only partially true. This is an important point
And spinosa got this right
This orientation self relevance how things are relevant to me
Right that sort of fundamental egocentrism a fundamental way in which you're prioritizing
Your perception on the world, right? You can't reason your way out of that
spinosa the most logical of the philosopher says no, no
The only thing that will invert the arrow of relevance is love. This is murdoch's point
Love is when you recognize something other than yourself is real, right?
Okay, so so let's okay. Let me ask you about that because
I've been thinking about the idea of being selfish. Yes, you know
Well psychopaths are selfish, but they also betray themselves
Yes, because psychopaths don't learn from experience and they doom their future selves
And so I kind of wonder if that love that
lifts you out of
This self orientation what it does in some sense is that it's the way you see the world if you see
Beyond this narrow selfishness because I don't really think there's any difference technically
In me in me taking care of the multitude of future selves that I will become and me treating you properly
I totally agree. Okay. Okay. I think your relationship to your future self is ultimately an agopic relationship
And I think that's the only way you can deal with a lot of empirical research. Okay. So you do you do? Yes
Oh, why the empirical research because I think the empirical research shows that
Like the I mentioned it in the Cambridge talk that I sent you the way
Right what if you do this
This is one instance among many experiments you go into a bunch of academics at a university
The people who are supposed to be the best at taking data and processing it
You present them with all the evidence that they should start saving for their retirement right now, right?
And they won't do it. You come back six months later
They will they will they you ask them at the time
Is this argument a solid solid argument great evidence? Yeah, come back six months. Have they changed not at all?
Yeah, the behaviorist behavioral therapists know that perfectly well, right? Yeah, but
So if you but if you do the following you say I want you to
Imagine your future self as a family member that you love and care about right right. They will start to
Save and more importantly the vividness of that imagery predicts how well that's so cool
Look, you know this this program that we worked on the future authoring program
Well, it's predicated on the idea of developing
A love for your future self. So so it's an exercise is in a real sense
it's it's like here and it's
The ethic that's underneath it although this wasn't particularly
conscious in my mind when I built it was
Knock and the door will open it's like okay
Let's play a game you get to have
What you want and need
But the rule is first of all you have to accept it and second of all you have to specify it
And so but let's just play it as a game
If you could if you could envision a future that would justify your suffering
That's a really good way of thinking about it justify your suffering
What would that entail and then people and then I make it practical
It's like well, what do you want for an intimate relationship?
How do you want to treat your family members? What sort of job or career like I break it into seven practicalities, you know
To nail it down to the ground
And I do believe that see one of the things we found we thought well
What predicts whether or not this works because it really works
We dropped the dropout rate of young men at moho college 50 percent
It should it should well it did yes
And and it had the biggest effect on those who were doing the worst which is not very common for psychological interventions
But one the only thing we could find
Content-wise that predicted how well it would work was number of words written
And so my sense was well that just was an index a rough index of how much thought they put into it
And how vividly and then it would be did they treat their future self with some love like genuinely
And then did they differentiate that so it wasn't just an abstract mountaintop conceptualization
So but let's add one wrinkle that brings the beauty thing back
Because you go back and ask them. Why didn't you pay attention to your future self?
Before well sometimes people don't think they could they have no idea that that's even a possibility
That's I don't deny that yeah, but overwhelmingly people said I don't want to look at that person because that's me old and ugly
They're afraid of it. Yeah, and it's an aesthetic judgment
It's an aesthetic judgment and what you have to do is get them to reform it
But what if that's an old it's a shallow aesthetic judgment. Yes, that's right exactly my wife. She she she does portraits
And one of the things that's really interesting about my wife's art is she will look at she's like goya, although, you know
Goya is goya obviously, but one of the things I really found striking about Tammy is
Like she did a very detailed picture of my daughter's surgical wound
And that's not an easy thing to look at right because you don't want to look at that
But that also ties in with the ideas we've been discussing about the fact that
so in in the story of exodus
when
God tells moses how to stop the israelites from being bitten by poisonous snakes
He insists that they have to look at what's poisoning them
And well, I think that's the with the mystery. Yes, the mystery of the crucifix. You bet right
Yeah, all these images that we have like the beauty of christ wounds all these things which sound so
completely
Pathological yeah to many people if you can understand them properly you can understand that that you have to gaze on that which most threatens you
Yeah, there's right there's a verse and then then you say well this inadequacy of vulnerability that characterizes old age
That's a terror in that yeah, and so people won't go there right but you what you do is you replace the shallow aesthetic
Right, don't let the appearances
Right right distract you right let the experiences disclose
What if that was an old family member right always look through
And see that those appearances are that's somebody who's been there right that you care about someone you love
Exactly and so you beautify them so you love them and the love and the beauty they reinforce each other
So for me to answer your question right the the you you're saying the primacy of love
And I think you ultimately me an agape glove
right that and beauty
if you're incapable
of turning the arrow of relevance and saying
I want that to exist rather than I want that to exist for me
Right
That's what beauty does and that's also the central move. I would argue in love
Okay, so do we do we want to detour into the true and the it's beautiful true and beautiful true and the good the good
Do you have something equally revealing to say about the good and
The true
Yeah, I do okay
Well, let's let's let's let's go there and then we'll continue through this because I thought that was really useful
Well, and and and I would like this if I if I would request that we return back to that whatever this discourse would
I I love following the the logos. That's that that that I
I aspire to be like socrates like a true christian
Well, but it's mostly like a two follower of socrates too right fair enough fair enough right and but I I'm hoping that in this
in this deal logos if we if we get into the depths
Of the true the good and the beautiful that we can address my criticism of you
Yep, which is I'm making a criticism on behalf of the of the enlightenment and cost. Yes, yes
Which is the fracturing of the the normativities into three autonomous spheres
Yeah, and this argument if it's going to go forward needs something that would
Yeah, I see I see I see what you're doing. You bet. Yeah. Is that okay with you? Yeah, that's all right, okay
so for me
The the the thing I want to say
first about about the good
is
There's two readings to make about about this
And one is and this is what the enlightenment did we can reduce and jonathan's already challenged this
But we can reduce the ethical we can sort we can reduce the good to the ethical good
So that when we're talking about goodness, we're asking how moral a person is in their standard modern meeting, right?
now
what
Plato argues is that is actually a derivative form of goodness
It's kind of an algorithmic form. It's kind of an algorithmic form
But so so here's the the central sort of at least I would argue now
Of course, there's going to be 10,000 plateness will disagree with everything I say because play does been around so long
Right, but I think I could make a good case and I think this lines up with
The best book I've ever read on play though DC Schindler's a Plato's critique of impure reason the best book hands down my whole life
DC Schindler's astonishing
But here's a here's a proposal
right
We and you can you can see date cart wrestling with this in the enlightenment and sort of failing we need
intelligibility
To be wedded to reality
Right, the structures of intelligibility have to be
Not identical to because that's impossible. You try idealism in that field
I'm sorry. That was too fast for some people, but I'll just let that go
But so I we the map has to correspond to the territory whether correspond
It has to there has to be a conformity
There has to be a contact and a wedding to them together
There can't be a space between them like there's between map and territory because soon as there's a space
There's what guarantees and what manages the space and at some point
This is this is Taylor's point. You need a contact epistemology. No, right, right, right, right?
So, you know, there's nothing you can do
right
That will show me or give me an argument for why intelligibility shall map should conform that way to reality
Because what you'll do is right locked in right and this is what Plato saw
Right, but what what Plato's basically saying is there is it's like if I can put it this way
I'll try and put it in a way that's more narrative
It's like there's a perpetual promise
That intelligibility will track reality and that we find that to be inexhaustibly the case
But there's no argument we can give that will ultimately explain that because every argument presupposes it
Does that track as I'm I'm not sure why the last part of that is true
Although I agree that it's true
So and I and what's running around in the back of my head while you're laying that out is I think well in some sense
That's the problem that evolution solves in a technical sense. So, you know, let's say
A mosquito lays a million eggs in its lifetime
And so that's a million mosquitoes whose epistemology better track ontology, but almost none of them do
So they all die. Yes. And so that that that mapping I think
Because it's philosophically important impossible in some sense
I think that
The process of evolution is actually what solves that and then our cognitive architecture emerges out of that evolve base
And so it's taken 3.5 billion years to produce the solutions that we have to mapping intelligibility onto
I totally agree with you about this. I agree
So, let me agree and then tell you why I think it goes deeper. Yeah, okay. So just very quickly
The the I think relevance realization basically does that same thing that evolution does
It has this it's a self-organizing system in which you would introduce variation and then selection
Your your attention is doing it right now. There's a there's a drive to open up mind wander vary
And then there's and what you're doing is constantly evolving your fittedness your optimal gripping
So towards some end, which is the dialogue of the conversation. Yes. Yeah, and whatever that's embedded in exactly. Yeah, right
Yeah, so you're doing this
Yeah, and there's a space of associations beside what you're doing
But yeah, what I'm saying is evolution actually presupposes
an ontology in which that
Will work, right? Right. So that's right. Okay, right. Okay. So that you should have something to say
But we talked about we've talked about that before like when we when we did that
thing on Genesis
And you talk about how it's this idea of a psychic projection
But the idea that let's say you example could imagine that you could psychically project patterns and and and
onto the world means that it presupposes that
The same problem that means that those patterns are presupposed in the manner in which the world exists
And that even be right in the historians of science. I've read who
attempt to embed the development of science in a Judeo-Christian ethic by necessity
Also, you know giving obeisance, let's say to the influence of the Enlightenment say that the
notion that
There was a logos
There's an ontological logos as well as an epistemological logos was that precondition for the development of the scientific attitude
And I think that's true. Yes. And I think and that's the that's the cornerstone of ancient epistemology
You don't ask the question how from this the the workings of my mind till I get to the ontology
You ask the question. Well, whatever knowledge there is presupposes intelligibility, right?
And then I asked I have to ask what must the world be like such that that intelligibility reliably exists
It's a very different orientation. That's for sure. Okay, so but let's take it that this is at least a plausible argument
the promise that intelligibility is wedded
to
reality
And there and that we can realize it through something like relevance realization cognitively or
Biologically adaptivity through evolution, right? That promise is continually made
But we can give no explanation for it because given what we've just said
Every attempt to explain it presupposes it as a fundamental thing
Okay, that seems just fine to me the fact that the promise is inexhaustibly kept
is the good
Hmm
Is that the good that is referred to in genesis when god uses the the logos to derive habitable order out of chaos
Well says it is good. Is that the same idea? I hope so. I mean
For me, that's what playdough means when he talks about how the good is even beyond being
Because the good makes possible
The intelligibility of reality. Okay. Well, that's kind of what I'm trying to also drive out in this system of propositions
And that's what I meant and I hope you took it as a compliment what I said
I think this is a neoplatonic argument you're making
You're you're you're doing a lot of the similar moves. Okay. Now the thing I have is
Right, so that's the good
And and then is there a way of and
Oh, you mean I think jonathan will have some important things to say
So that's like the a priori structure of being before there is there's actually beings. It's like there's it's there's an it's an
In this there's a there's a potential intelligibility
Even for the finite in relation to the infinite
Exactly because if and and what you can do is you can reject that fundamental goodness
And I and notice I can't give you an argument to get you back into it
But but if you reject that fundamental goodness, you will be you will be you and you you see dey karp wrestling with this
Because he tries to
He gets sort of stuck inside the kajato, right? And he's trying and and he's I think they're for you
Right and and and and he realizes. Oh
Oh, I could be trapped in solipsism and skepticism. And what does he do? He says, oh, no, no
There must be a god that guarantees
That the intelligibility the clear and distinct ideas map onto reality
He realizes he needs something outside of the argument in order to guarantee that fundamental goodness
That makes everything else possible
But then what he does is he creates famously a circular argument for that god
And so he tries to make an argument for it, but he ends up presupposing the very thing
He's trying to prove this is what I mean by our apprehension of it
Is is not something that is produced inferentially it is an apprehension of a fundamental this fundamental goodness
And I can't I can't give you an argument or an evidence or evidence for now. I think
I think ethical goodness is dependent on and reflective of at times exemplary of
That ontological of your la la mi goodness
And don't you think that that's the reason why in so many traditions the infinite is always referred to negatively like the whole notion of
Negative theology or oh, that's interesting say more well the idea that that
If you want to express that which is which is the source of being you end up having it almost and it empties itself
Yes, it is empties itself of all characteristics
While recognizing that it is at the same time this the summation of all characters
It's like the good ultimately is that which everything is culminating to and then
It's a kind of giving away into something which is always more and you think that's related to that a prior acceptance of
the of the existence of the relationship between
Intelligence and and being well that it's that that that this thing that guarantees that has the is being pointed at too
By these processes. I think so. I've been thinking about I've been thinking
I don't know I can take you on this this experiment that I've talked about
This idea that that identity is kinetic that identity always kind of empties itself into more
So I you always use the example of an object like you have a it's like you have a cup and then you have you have
So certain level you have different aspects of the cup
So in order for it to reach it's good all these elements in order for them to reach it's good
They have to kind of they have to give themselves into something which
Cannot be found at the level of their elements
So so what you end up having is you have hierarchies of beings that that are moving towards that identity
But as they reach their highest point they actually empty themselves
Into the higher identity and then you move up and then you end up with something that is beyond being ultimately
Okay, so let me try something to you because that might start to sow the good and the true and the beautiful together
I've been doing a lot on
Marrying Maro Ponti with Plato and John Roots and other people are doing this
I will but here like the that thing you just pointed out so
Maro Ponti's point is you never you can never completely see any object
So let's just talk because the number of right or the number of just even
Uh perceptual aspects is which is what the castle was doing
Yeah, yeah, right and then of course then there's the imaginal aspects
I can also all the functions that are implicit in this all the use like right
And then so one of the things I've been arguing is is that if you take a look at Plato the
Eidos I originally meant the look of a thing, but he didn't mean the look
He meant something like the aspect and here's here's what the like so
You have all of these aspects and they're unfolding inexhaustibly
There's a through but they don't unfold chaotically. There is a coherent through line that runs through them
Right you get a sense of as you said the identity, but here's the thing that through line is not itself an aspect
It can't be because if you you're making a fundamental it's an a priori necessity right and it runs through it
but notice how
right first of all that's starting to get us into
Not right a sense of the goodness because that's the promise being kept the through line is the promise being kept
It's also a different notion of truth. This is something I want to talk about later if we get a chance
Truth is this as ala Thea as disclosure rather than as correspondence
But notice first of all how that corresponds to beauty and think about what Tammy's doing with the paintings
She's right because she's she's don't step don't stop at this one aspect as the appearance
But open it up open up all and see and fulfill the promise
The aspects even in something horrible. Yes. Yes, that's dependent on your willingness to gaze
Which is the story of exodus and and the bronze serpent. Well, and I would say the crucifixion as well
That's really interesting because hawn talks about we've lost the ability to linger
With things and that's why we can no longer
You know if chimps if chimps are in the jungle and they come across a decent sized snake
They'll stand at a distance from it
But they will gaze at it for up to 24 hours and they have a particular cry
Which which is a snake ra that's the name of the cry which they utter that brings other chimps
And so they hate snakes right in innately do you show a rubber snake to a chimp that's never seen one?
He'll hit the ceiling but then he'll look and so they're out there gazing on the snake
It's part of they're fascinated by it despite the fact that it's also simultaneously threatening. Yes
So I think that there's increasing evidence for for something like awe
It's awe definitely well, that's manifest in pilo erection in animals
Okay, but think about what awe does awe is a kind of love and all the things awe does which is really interesting
It's one of the few instances where people reliably report a sense of the shrinkage of the self
That is nevertheless as a positive element to it. Yeah, even though they're terrified
Yeah, they want to they want to follow it through they want to go into
Well, I think that's partly so imagine this so so imagine awe imagine pilo erection now
So a cat puffs up and you know, that's the hair standing up in the back of your neck. Oh, it's the same instinct. It is
Yeah, and I'm doing work on this with a student of mine right now and and how we've exacted the pilo erection into aesthetic
Yeah experience, right. Okay. So imagine this now
You're out you look at the night sky and it's it's awe inspired and so there's also a call to imitate there
So you see the image of mary for example with her foot on the serpent and her head in the stars
Well, she's looking at the stars and she's so that's the cosmic realm. It's the infinite and now
She's awe struck by that vision
And then she in order to adapt to that vision of the infinite
You have to imitate that which instills the awe and that's represented by her foot on the serpent. Oh, that's cool
Yes, that's for sure. That's why you know, there's there's literally hundreds of Renaissance images of that
mary head in the stars
Foot on the serpent and I thought I've been thinking through this awe issue for and it has this interesting association with beauty
But you can imagine that
When a cat dances sideways and pilo erect. It's trying to look larger
It's trying to look as if it can overcome the predator. Well, that's what awe does to us is that when we've
Historically evolutionarily what we did when we felt awe in the face of a predator is we
We felt compelled to imitate the predator so that we could become ferocious enough to overcome the predator
And so that's that call to an expanded being that you would associate for example with development of the shadow
It's like when you look at something brutal, you know, that really terrifies you
It has to call that
Capacity for predatory behavior out of that monstrous capacity
Now it should be integrated into the kind of ethic that we're describing
But you're not good if you're harmless
It's way more than that and that awe in the face of what's catastrophic is a call to be
More than the catastrophic thing which certainly makes you monstrous in a sense. Well, that's not really interesting
because
I mean, it's also
It also produces
sort of increased
Seeking of others
Which makes sense because one of the ways we can make ourselves band together band together
And then and then that seems to get exacted into right
I don't have to be big
But I can connect or participate in something right right and then you get reverence
As opposed to just raw awe. What's really interesting just to supplement your argument
And this is work. I'm doing with song you chin
If you like they have a they have a device now that will actually cause people to have chills the chills up and down
This line run cold water up and down in the right way
What you do and what you can do is you can really enhance people's aesthetic experience
But even more basically you get people to listen to like to the same
Passage of music and you put one group of people in a slightly cooler room
They will have a more powerful aesthetic experience because it facilitates pilo erection. Exactly. That's so cool
Yeah, I was so thrilled about this notion of pilo erection being associated with the instinct to imitate
You know to put those two things together
It's like well, what do you do in the face of the predator? Well, one is run away. The other is
Become superordinate to the predator and then you might say well
What's the worst possible predator which I think is part of the Judeo-Christian narrative because we're trying to
Because the snake in the garden is satan. It's like well. What's the worst predator? It's not the snake bad as snakes are
It's like a super snake. It's a meta snake
It's the sum total of everything that threatens you and so that calls you to be more than that
Whatever that is. I don't know a lot about the biology but biology
But do the do animals experience this pilo erection?
in with let's say a member of their own species that is bigger or more
Dominating sure. Yes, they do sure and we also have some preliminary and it's ethnographic
So you have to be careful with it that they do something that looks like awe you'll get a monkey
You've got the snake thing but there's also a video like of a macaque monkey and it's goes out onto a precipice
Which is a little bit dangerous. Uh-huh to watch the sunrise not doing anything. Uh-huh just sits there
Well, you know monkeys will look longer if you show them photos of of their troop
They gaze longer at the high status individuals as well
And if they are encountering a high status individual who could take them out in some sense
But not merely as an expression of power as the primatologists insist then they do show
Pilo erection in response to the threat from the superior
But they're also fascinated by it and you can imagine that part of that fascination is
The locking of their attention onto what they could become right because that's what at least at least that it
Interests me more in the sense of beauty, right? Yes, where it's it is this sense of
Shrinking in front of something in the sense feeling that you're smaller than that and then this desire to move into it
Or contact imitation as a kind of internalization a kind of being wetting yourself to someone
Yeah, and to form a worship a primary form of worship, right because you
You worship what you you imitate what you worship. They're the same thing
So, okay. Well, that was fun. So shall we move to the next one? I think so. I mean, I'm getting a sense of
How the true the good and the beautiful could be potentially integrated
Because I think that's a necessary requirement for this argument and notice how we are moving outside of we didn't talk about true
We can talk about that later. Yeah, we're moving outside of sort of standard ways of talking about
At least goodness and beauty here. I think there's similar ways of doing a truth that could actually get us back to something that
Yeah, well, it's nice to put the dot biological twist on it too
I'd wanted to run one thing before we move on which is that the way that I tend to think about it in terms of
um
When we talked about the idea of the through line. Yes, I think that's the idos
I think that's what the form is in play dough. Well, it isn't it isn't what Aristotle thought it was. It isn't just a specificity
Right of necessary and sufficient conditions
So would you feel comfortable with the notion that it's the manner in which the multiplicity is gathered?
It's the logos, right? And so it actually gathers multiplicity. Don't listen to my words
Listen to the logos that gathers them together. All things are one, right? Heraclitus
Well, so then what we would presume
Visionally is that the thing that unites the true the good and the beautiful is the logos now
We shouldn't make the presumption of knowing that we understand what that logos is
We've got some hints about what it is, but we can't characterize it entirely. Is that a reasonable
Proposition in your estimation. I think so. I think uh
in
Especially if we're careful to do what you did before which is we have
um
We have a dipolar way of invoking the logos the logos is both
the gathering
All right, the throughlining if I can put it that way, but it is also
right, right
It is also the ontological reality that affords that happening. It's it's the fact that I can't exhaust it
Right, no matter how far I push it. So whatever through line I have is at most
um
A signification or a symbol of the fact that it's inexhaustible
Did that make sense what I'm trying to say? What do you know?
I'm not trying to understand that that the through line is the the significance that inexhaustible
In the manner in which it points up or in the manner in which it
inexhaustible like this or inexhaustible
The manner in which it's the fact that that intelligibility between between representation and actuality
Remains regardless of how okay how far you push it
So that would sort of be like the notion that the universe is logical
Logo space essentially, but and that there's that we're not going to run out of that
But it's not going to be logical in the modern sense right of a complete system
Even though go to you can't reduce it to an algorithm exactly exactly so the see this is what I mean by saying
I don't think of the form as
Like a standard Aristotelian essence at least how it's been taught. Yeah to me which is a set of necessary and sufficient conditions
Like the low like there's no be there's no becoming in that is there there's just being
well because becoming implies
transformation of something that's algorithmic but in a but in a manner that's not
That doesn't escape from the logos and I mean, I think that's how reality constitutes itself
And that's probably that's part of the solution to the scandal of induction
It's like no you can't predict with 100 percent certainty what's going to happen next
but
What will happen next despite its unpredictability like the next note in a symphony is still predictable exactly. This is what I mean about the good
The reason why Hume couldn't deal with the problem of induction is it requires the apprehension of the good
Which is the promise that this is not going to be logical identity
But nevertheless it is going to be inexhaustibly coherent
It's going to remain beautiful and in that in that sense
It's always going to be
Something right to which so it's not algorithm. It's not reducible to an algorithm
But that doesn't mean what you said it that doesn't mean it's not habitable. It doesn't mean it's not good
It doesn't mean it's not coherent exactly right
And your example the the music which john russen used the musicality of intelligibility as I think the best way to think about
Yeah, I think so too. I think that's actually I actually think that's why we like music
Yes, because I think that music is actually the most
Representational art form because for a variety of reasons first of all, we don't see objects
We see patterns and we interpret some patterns as objects
So patterns are primary then we're looking for the harmonious interplay of patterns and then it's not
It's not strictly a causal relationship because the music is governed by principles
But it's not formally predictable. Otherwise it gets boring. Exactly, right? So you see that I think most particularly early
I've I've experienced that most particularly with box
Brandenburg concertos which have this amazing
Continual unfolding that's so logical. It almost appears mathematical and yet it's unpredictable
And you don't know where it's going to go and it goes there and you think man that just that's just right
So yeah, and so you could say that you could say that about pretty much everything that exists
That is that you know, I like the glass because it's just easy
So so the the idea is that there is a through line in this glass and but the through line
Goes through potentiality, which is indefinite
It is I can encounter a million glasses in my life and they will all be different
That's like the realm of musical possibility. Exactly. It's all but they all end up being predictable to a certain extent once I
Grasp it like when I see the glass I recognize it
But I couldn't have predicted that this is the glass that would exist. There's a there's a kind of potentiality which
Which is maintained within the identity of the glass, but it's not it's inexhaustible
Right. And when you see that when you apprehend that and this is scarry's point
This is
Being struck by beauty you see the tree and it's somehow it's like every other tree you've seen and yet it's not
It reminds you of the idos it reminds you of just what you said
And that's love I think that that's love too like in love in the sense that I've often said love is
The capacity for unity and multiplicity to exist
That's what love is. Right. That is that I
I recognize something of you that we have in common
But I also recognize you're completely separate from me and that is and both are values
Those both have to coexist for love to be real. It has to be
separation well to give the devil is due you know, I would say that's the kernel of good that the diversity types are pushing
You know, we need to recognize the utility of multiplicity. It's like fair enough
The the problem with that a problem with that is well, yeah, but what's where's the unity here?
Where's the unity? It's all diversity. It can't be all diversity because then all we do we're in conflict
so and we we tend to have a
We tend to be the modern world had tends towards radical they tend to want to radical
change unity to uniformity and then have this kind of crazy
Exploded multiplicity whereas the real this kind of natural relationship between between otherness is
exactly this
both recognizing
What we have in common and at the same time being kind of fascinated and attracted to that which we have
Well, you think about the reason this conversation works is because we have grounds for commonality in our understanding
But that would be sterile without the multiplicity because we would just run over the same territory
And so, you know, we hope we aim towards the same thing enough so that we can communicate
but I wouldn't like it at all if
You didn't each of you didn't bring something to bear on the discussion that i'm incapable of bringing to bear on it
so the the last thing I want to bring up is of course, I mean
People are gonna say i'm jesus muggling but there's that's that's the
That's the the reason one of the reasons are where we can understand that in christianity
The trinity is seen as the infinite is the image of the infinite that we have is
Is a contradictory possibility of absolute unity and absolute multiplicity
And so we we just throw those two up at the same time and we say the infinite is absolutely multiple and absolutely one
And you cannot without contradiction and you cannot totally
That you can't reconcile that completely because that is ultimately
The it's a problem which practically appears everywhere anyways because everything is always
Everything in the world has something in common with everything else
You know, you know, if it's just being itself, but it it also necessarily must be different for the difference to
Goodman argument every object is infinitely some similar and right and right which is
Restatement of the problem of perception itself. Yes, like well, you've seen a glass. Yes, but you haven't seen this glass
Well, how much difference is there is well, there's an infinite number of differences as it turns out
All right, so this is a this is a this is quite a switch here
And I think this is a radical
uh proposition
That maybe not because once you hear it you think well, yes, and then you think well that's self evidence like yeah, well
Not so not so quick here the description of a structure of values or an ethic
Subject to the code of sales that we've already added
Or set of priorities is a narrative. So the description of a system of
Perceptual prioritizations and actions is a narrative
What do you think the description that could be it could also be representation in image
It wouldn't have to be a verbal not a grant a imagistic or verbal description
That is what we regard as a narrative. So this is what I I wanted to again challenge you on
And it sort of overlaps with the discussion we've having about the true and the good and the beautiful
because I think there are
Three three different dimensions by which we organize intelligibility
So there's a narrative
The example I use is video games and and there's a reason why people are doing the virtual exodus
They're preferring video games over with the real world because of the dimensions that are found in video games
So one is a narrative and the narrative they belong to clearly. That's one of the things so
Total agreement that there's two other features that are deeply meaningful to them not
Semantic but meaning in life meaningful right one is a nomological order
There's a set of rules that they understand that makes sense of that world
So that they can move around in that world with confidence
Because if they have a narrative, but it doesn't it isn't undergirded by an
Okay, is that a reflection in the video game of the same through line and
And mapping of intelligibility onto ontology within the that's what I think the nomological but it's a simpler world
Yes, so they can establish that first. So you're saying
Okay, so it's a slightly different argument
Perhaps because I said well a narrative is a description of an ethic
And you say there's more than
There's more ways that the world needs to be apprehended than the purely narrative
And I think that's fine
But does that bear on the argument that the description of an ethic is a narrative?
No, because we also describe other ways in which we
prioritize
Our perceptions in things that aren't narratives that are nomological. That's what we call a scientific theory
The theory of evolution right is not it is not a narrative
It's a description of the way things unfold or let's they say newton's laws newton's laws are not narrative in any fashion
But do you think okay? So let me push back on that fair enough fair enough
And then you could say well a set of mathematical axioms and and the
Operations that are derived from the axioms is also not a narrative
But so and fair enough. So then I would say and this will get us into discussion about science later
Is the intelligibility and the attraction of those non narrative descriptions of the world
dependent on their being
nested inside a narrative, but see and so here's where I'm going to answer you back
I'm going to say they mutually they reciprocally require each other just like what we were doing with the truth
Okay, okay, so that that then okay fine
So so is that the same thing as narrative and the scientific description mutually requiring each other right?
But you can't reduce the one to the either to the
You can't okay one you can't reduce the nomological to the narrative or the narrative to the nomological
That's why that's what I was trying to get at three dimensions almost like a cartesian graph with three dimensions
Right, okay, you can't reduce if I remove right because I suppose if you do that too
You run into the postmodern trap, which is that there's nothing but the narrative intelligibility
There's nothing but the narrative there has to yes, and there also has to be something
There has to be a space within which we can compare narratives move between narratives and
Learn narratives right and there and there has to be something that allows us to override narrative bias
You know the research on narrative bias. It's powerful. It's one of our most powerful bias
There has to be something that can kick us out of the narrative bias
but I think okay the way that that's the way that I would phrase it is
myself is that
The reason why we tend to think or like even the way that I presented is that the priority of narrative is because
Narrative is the embodied manner in which we engage with a structural value. That is it's the way that we engage in a structural value
and so because because we
See a disc and usually it has a narrative that embodied pattern is a description of the embodied pattern
I think that it I think that it's because I don't know if it's a story if you acted out
I don't know if it's a story
Until it's a representation of a pattern of action because otherwise it's it's more like a pattern of behavior
You know like so for example imagine you watched wolves interacting. Yeah, you could say well
It's as if they're following the following narrative rules
But they're not because they don't have it's not narrative. It's a pattern in their behavior
right, but for the same reason that
That it's the through line like for the same reason that you can't see the glass from the elements of the glass
It doesn't mean that the glassness like the identity of the glass has a causal relationship to its
element it's just not a call it's not that a mechanical causal relationship
It's a the causal of identity
It's it and so the the narrative or let's say the pattern of behavior is causal from above you could say
Because it's that the way in which you recognize that the behavior is a pattern in the first place
Okay, I want to push back on all right. No, you have to
This is one of the areas where we we kind of don't totally agree. Yeah, but that's good because
Well, this is a real mystery this problem because it is the relationship between science and the narrative of meaning
It's a relationship between ontology and epistemology or between description and value
I mean, so it's no wonder that this is causing, you know, a little bit of trouble
I want to throw in one more dimension
Which is right, which is you could also level up in the game
There's a way in there. There's a dimension that's not a narrative. It's it's an act of self-transcendence, right?
I call that I thought about as a meta key that you can scale
That has to be that's quidditch. By the way, that's what rolling represented with quidditch because there's a game and a meta game
If you win the meta game, you also win the game, right? Okay, but not vice versa, which is very it's so smart
So sorry you you do this turn you'll just throw these observations that are like
What's even worse than that?
I think that the quidditch players are chasing is the round ks of lkma that
It contains all the potential of the world, right? And it's also the spirit of mercury. I like it's like
I don't know how she did that. It's just beyond belief that she managed that. I don't I really don't
It's like if you get if you the way to understand it like in terms of a glass would be like once you grasp the logos
This is the st. Maximus way of speaking too once you grasp the logos
Then you you are able to you've captured all the rules and everything else
And once you understand what a glass is then you don't have to you can recognize every glass in the entire world
It's like it's such a massive power
You overcome the entire game through getting this one thing which is like
Which is often the image as a seed or as a golden ball or as something sparkling
Which is which you represent like in the world, but it's ultimately pointing above it or well, that's part perhaps that's a
Reflected in the insistence that adam is to name all the animals
Right in in in the in the story of adam and eve because that's obviously kept in the narrative for a reason
And it has to do with the power that
Naming and sub doing in the sense that you've described which is the also simultaneous imposition of a hierarchy of
categorization that goes along with naming that gives you a grip on the world
And that that grip is associated with the moral necessity and requirement in that story
It's for me the nomological dimension is the naming dimension
That's what science does
Broadly construed and that's different from telling a story
Naming things is different from telling a story. So but ultimately this is where this is where I kind of come back again to the
We're gonna we'll take you
We have to not go too far to this because we've been through this from down this path before but
so ultimately because
We are not disembodied beings like this is so science
This type of nomological order
Is taken from a position where I am
As I see the nomological order I have to climb the yes the ladder and so and
Especially most narratives always have a sense of this is moses on the mountain again
Yes, yes, but there's also there's that's why the narrative is always this like almost all narratives are that it's
You notice the difference and once you you notice the distance and when you notice the distance
Then you have to reestablish a connection with that
With which you're distant because you don't need an ethic unless you notice the difference
You just I mean you don't need at least you don't need an explicit ethic
You don't have to why why not unless you notice the difference because you don't have to tell someone how to go downstairs unless they can't do it
You're going you don't you don't have a you don't have an explicit set of rules
Okay, so there has to be a there has to be an objection
There has to be a problem so st. Paul says something like okay the law is written on the human heart
Which means that it doesn't mean all the laws are written
Extensively in every detail in the human heart
It's like no that is in the human heart in that in that little golden ball in that center in that place where everything comes together you have
Contain all the potentiality everything that has the through line is contained in that
But now if you notice the difference
Then you have to formulate that difference and then that becomes the laws
Or just the ways of being so I can say something at first like
When you're driving a car like there's specific laws and then a problem comes up
It's like oh well
Actually, there's a differentiation here, which we have to make or else there's a problem right
Which means the ethic that's currently keeps getting more and more detail and more and more
So you start with the law you end up with like this in Jewish tradition
You end up with this huge compendium of exceptions and like details and everything
But ultimately the idea is that all of that is ultimately contained in the
Something which gathers it all together into one into this ineffable point that transcends
I might have followed this but but but the space in which all the laws are being made and written
That's not a narrative space
Right
Let me go after you on that for a minute. The Ten Commandments is not a story because no, I don't think that's true
You think that I think it is a story. That's why christ when christ so he okay, that's a good entry point
That's a good entry point. Well because the story which reveals the Ten Commandments, right?
Okay, but there's also a story in it aren't this aren't I believe that yeah, there is a little bit
But I think they're you're right
But why this is why we say that the Ten Commandments is embedded in a story without the story of the israelites leaving
Leaving egypt finding themselves in the desert of of of nothingness having to reconnect with the transcendent
That is why the law exists. So the nomological
order
Is embedded in the story you wouldn't have to but the reverse is also the case
Go ahead. Go ahead if there isn't if god doesn't offer us the nomological order
There's no point for the exodus in the story, right?
Right, that's okay. We could we could hypothesize that it comes up from the bottom and down from the top
No, no, this is this is even before that right. We're trying to talk about
Like I'm proposing that the narrative and the nomological and whatever we want to call this self transcending dimension
Are irreducible to each other they're not neither none of them can exist independent
That's why I'm using the three dimensions. Yeah metaphor. Yeah, right. They are interdependent, but they're not they're not reducible
So I'm resisting I would say the the ontology is is not captured inside
epistemology because
Epistemology cannot reach to the full extent of the multiplicity of ontology
So, okay, so now why is that relevant to what you just said?
That's part of the irreducibility you're arguing. I think in some sense that
No matter what the story is there's something that's real that's beyond that story
Is that okay? Okay. So so let me put a couple of twists in that got it
Is that okay for you Jonathan right now? No, I think it's fine. We'll keep going. Okay. Okay
So you said there's no story in it in the 10 commandments, right and Jonathan had one objection
I have a different take on that that that he may appreciate maybe maybe you too
When the Pharisees so the Pharisees and the scribes are always trying to
Trap Christ in the gospels into making a heretical statement or doing something that clearly violates the law
So they call them on healing on the Sabbath for example
And there's like 10 stories like that where smart people
Who run on algorithms try to trap them and it never works because he does the thing you described
Which is he just refers to a higher order principle or even three levels up and says like no
Yes, but one of the things that happens is the Pharisees come and say
Well, here's the decalogue which is the most important law and the trick there is no matter what he says
He says the others are less important and so now he's a heretic and and they get to take him away and he says
Put God above all else
And love your neighbor as yourself
Mm-hmm
It's all of the laws are derived from that spirit
And that spirit is that spirit is a story and that story is the logos
And so that's the move that I don't I slow it down, Jordan. Okay, I get that's the spirit
I totally get that well then the question is what is the spirit? But why is the spirit necessarily a story?
Well, I don't know why it's necessarily a story
But I know that it's necessarily a story in that context because the spirit that christ is referring to that unites the decalogue
Is the logos and the whole biblical corpus the narrative that stem that spans the entire biblical corpus
is the
account of the elaboration of that spirit across time and it's
embodied incarnation and that presents itself as a story and so and I think the reason for that is that it just
Okay, so so I mean I get I get I understand your point. I understand the point that you're making now and so
I'm actually understanding your point better than I've ever suggested it before
Well, you're talking about that that which transcends the current narrative and that has to be there. There's no reality
so
Okay, let's
Let's leave that for for a moment
I just want to maybe one more thing because I think it's important. Sorry. No, no, that's fine
I think we're at a key moment
So we are so one of the things that that that we've been discussing and this has been coming back over and over is that
So let's say that we understand that there is a certain type of equivalence and two functions for
Anomological order like a hierarchy that's presented
You know like just a series of categories which are related in embedded structure, right?
And I see science committed to that. Okay
And that this also coexist for sure in scripture
That's what we're seeing is like it actually it coexist together
Yeah, you have the story of the israeli the bible and then you have these series of laws
Which is actually not just n it's a lot a lot a lot of laws, right?
So you have all these laws and so
But one of the things that you've said several times is that you you want to you feel like the solution
To the meaning crisis. Yes, does it need narrative or that narrative shouldn't be part of the solution?
And so I think that if those two are
Both have their function, I'd say why is it that you want to remove one and keep the other? Oh, okay?
That's an excellent question. This is something sam harris struggles with too by the way. No, I'm dead serious about that
I'm dead serious about that. So
Let me answer this really carefully and uh, tell me if we're getting too far afield from the main discussion
Okay, so I'm going to depend on both of you
My argument is the nomological order that one of the problems in the meaning crisis is the nomological order that we have
Is no longer in any way relatable to or wet can be wedded to a narrative because the nomological order we have
Right is that there it
So what used to bridge between the nomological order and the narrative order is teleology
So teleology says the nomological order is ordered, but it's ordered in this way
And the teleology has this structure and then narrative says, oh, I can glum onto I can I can
Conform to a teleological order because stories are inherently teleological
But they're different from just a teleology just telling a teleology isn't a story
But stories can attach to teleology. Is that why is why is describing a teleology not a story?
Because you could describe it
I think that's you could describe the cup but then the problem is as well
Can you describe the top cup in the absence of a narrative?
And I mean, I think part of the argument I'm trying to make in this. So this is our key
Disagreement in some sense is I don't think you can okay
And so well, let's be really careful because we might we might also be engaged in in semantic drift
So I I'm trying to limit
We can trivialize what we mean by narrative
And we they need a description of a series of events is a narrative. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. No. No, I don't want to do that
I get your point. No, no, we don't want to we don't want to widen the words so much that the argument
Though but
Wait a minute. No, no, I would I would actually object to that because any descriptions of events that I can conceive as being one
Is has to have some kind of narrative structure. Otherwise, we have the other one. We have the same problem of
of multiplicity and
And combinatorial if I can recognize that events connect together that that means that you would you have to not metaphorically
I actually no, I agree with that. But not but let me challenge it
Unfortunately, but and I'm not speaking metaphorically here because if I'm speaking metaphorically, we're just golfing another thing
That means that music has a narrative
Because it has a melody you're saying a melody is a narrative and that strikes me as a very
Improper thing to say that. Okay. That's a tough one man. Yeah, because
Then you have to start to wrestle with
Well, what do you mean by music?
Because you could say that the the sequence of the notes in and of itself
May not have a narrative although I'm not certain of that but you could say that because
But then the question is
When you're listening to the music and it has the effect that you regard as music on you
How much of that effect including the aesthetic is a consequence of a narrative?
So I would say well when you say music, how sure are you that what you're saying is
That's nothing but the relationship of the notes to one another. I agree. That's a good point
Because there's no embodiment in that right right and there's a sense in which music is neither subjective or objective
Right like beauty. Yes. Yes. It has to have something
That is at least analogous to to narrative because in order for you to recognize and and it's funny because the modern's tried to go away from
Yeah, you understand the modern's really tried to break it
But there was in in in any traditional society
There are tropes of music which help you understand when something's beginning when something's ending
And you can map them on to narrative very directly because that's what happens
Slide you because if you give me them you say oh when I'm going to send you a narrative to mirror to melody
Then I'll say here's a logical argument and there's a progression and a through line from the premises to the conclusion. Is that a narrative?
Well, that's a tough one right because because the the fact that you selected out those those okay
Here's something I've been thinking about
I'm going to take a slight detour but go right back to the point
So I I thought about this more when I was talking to Richard Dawkins because I think Dawkins is a good faith player
And I think he believes he's a real scientist and he believes that the truth will set you free
Which scientists have to believe to be scientists because they cannot be scientists if they're not pursuing the truth
The truth is sacred to absolutely. Absolutely. You want to admit that but it is okay
So so I was thinking about the scientific endeavor and I
I thought a lot about this when I was reading Jung's work on alchemy because Jung attempted to
Situate the development of science in this alchemical fantasy and it's very interesting piece of work
So he believes that there was this immense motivated narrative that provided the historical precondition in the realm of unconscious fantasy
For the flourishing of science. So it's an amazing argument in any case
Thinking about that I thought well, there's a set of facts and that's kind of the argument you're making
There's a set of facts independent of the narrative and that's kind of the scientific viewpoint
There's a set of facts independent of the narrative and even more importantly
We should identify the set of facts that's maximally independent of any narrative
Because why should your facts prevail and we want a universal set of facts and fine
Look what we've got with that. But then I think wait a second
When you're practically engaged in the processes of science the sort of things that kuhn tried to lay out
Is it not the case that you're always engaged within a
system of practice and perception
That's defined by at least an implicit if then statement. And so I would say
if
This is your aim then
That's the set of relevant and true facts conditional implications. Well, yeah
Well, so so if you're a medical researcher, it's like well, here's here is what the cancer cell is doing
Well, what do you mean doing because it's doing an infinite number of things
Oh, well if we want to understand the cancer cell so that we can eradicate cancer
Then this is what the cancer cell is doing now. It's also doing something
That's independent of that narrative. But the weird thing about that is that
It's doing such a plethora of things independent of that narrative that you drown in the complexity
Of course, so so then so then we have a problem here, right?
Is that you they have the facts of the cancer cell which are multiplicitous
Then you have the set of relevant facts, which hopefully are still facts
But those aren't derivable without the narrative that we should save lives that saving lives is good that we can
Pay careful attention to the horrors of disease and in the attempt to ameliorate suffering
All of that framework seems to be a precondition for the abstraction of the relevant facts
I agree with everything you said. Okay, what I disagreed with was the identity statement you slipped in which is the
The ethic is a narrative. That's exactly what's in dispute here. The dispute isn't that we don't need these normative structures
I'm not disputing that at all. What I'm what I'm disputing is that they're all reducible to the narrative
Ethic that there's also a
Right. Well, that's also why I wanted to get to the last I mean
I think that I'm coming closer to you than ever because
In the sense that because I need to work it out
But because I I see that in like let's say that there is
Clearly a distinction in the story like in the story
There is a story and then there's the laws and they're related, but they're different. And so I need to think about how they're
Why they're right? Well, one of the things well
There's an interesting weirdness there that's also associated with the scientific enterprise because one of the things you're trying to do
Imagine if you impose a strict narrative that there's a very limited set of facts that make themselves manifest
Well, what you want to do scientifically is say well
Let's abstract out the set of relevant facts in a manner that's relevant to a multitude of
Redemptive narratives simultaneously. Okay, so let me pick up on that
So let me try and using what we've just said specify the difference how I would put it
I think what science does is it picks up on
Nomological relations which are supposed to be as you say causal invariance for the universe
Right force equals mass times acceleration. We'll forget Einstein right across narratives
Right, right a narrative is not about causal laws. A narrative is about an
Irrepeatable causal pathway when I ask why did Napoleon lose at Waterloo? I don't give you a law
I give you a narrative. I give you a narratives are this event leads to this event
It's a through line like you said, but it's a through line that explains the specific occurrence of specific events
It's exactly the opposite of my mind of what science does
Science is trying to explain the universality that is not captured in the specifics of a specific causal pathway
That's why I can't see okay, so then okay, so imagine this imagine this
You have a so there's this notion in the old testament
There's a sequence of stories
So it's an aggregation of stories and there's an idea that the meta narrative of christ is implicit in that
Set of narratives. Yes. And so then I have this idea. Well, and Jung talked about this as well said
Imagine you take any random sample of narratives comprehensive random sample of narratives
And you attempt to extract out the common story. It's going to be an image of something like christ
You could even say that that's what christ is in some sense
so and we can argue about that but
It's a it's it's like saying that the hero narrative is archetypal
It's the same idea if you have 25 narratives and you see what makes them interesting adventure stories
It's the hero archetype
So the reason why you can recognize it as a through line in the first place is because it has a pattern
But that's my point my point is just like the through line of all the aspects is not an aspect
The through line of all the stories is not itself a story. Yeah, but see I'm not so sure that's that is definitely what we're arguing about
And I'm not I'm not saying I know this
There may be a distinction between
as story
And the pattern of all stories and maybe that's something we can think about too because in my work in maps of meaning I called
Just a narrative a story
But the the story that unites all narratives is a meta story
It's and piaget caught on to this too in some sense because
He started to try to find out what kids regarded as true and then by the end of his career
He said well what we really want to know if we're studying truth isn't the nature of any contingent truths
So any representations within a system narrative otherwise
But the process we need to specify the process by which all truths come to be as the ultimate truth
And then I would say that the meta narrative that constitutes christ from the symbolic perspective is the story of the
process by which
What would we say the it's the story it's certainly the story of the process by which narratives transform
It's not exactly a story because it's a meta story
It's but it's the problem of it's the problem of this kind of apophatic move
It's kinematic reality, which is true also of the nomological order as well
It is the origin of the nomological order. It's not a nomological order
Exactly in the same way that the origin of a narrative is not a narrative
It's not a detailed narrative or say the pattern patterns all move into the manner in which they
Transcend themselves and ultimately give up to this apophatic like this this negative
Space or negative reality and I think the nomological and the narrative and what this self transcending dimension
They all converge
Okay, so imagine imagine that's not to say they're identical
No, of course they're not because that's why they can write right right right
And I I think if they were so obviously identical, we wouldn't have a conflict between science and religion
Which we apparently have so so it's an important distinction
So imagine you have this set of narratives that are particularized and out of that you
You extract a general pattern and the pattern is something akin to the process of adaptation itself
Which is the manifestation of the divine word let's say and its ability to call order out of chaos
It's got this hierarchy of narratives and there's something at the pinnacle
And so then imagine that you have a set of corresponding facts and each specific narrative would give you a set of
proximal facts
But there's an abstraction from the facts that approximates universal scientific truths
But I would say that maybe they exist in relationship to the application of that meta narrative
Because isn't it the case now? I don't know. I can't figure this out
Isn't it the case that we abstract out commonalities?
like force equals mass times acceleration
Because we want to further our adaptation to the world. Yeah as simultaneously
We're exploring the intrinsic logos of
Ontology, but we've already agreed to some degree that there's a there's a
Similitude between that ontology and the epistemology. And so maybe as we abstract out from scientific truths towards the universal we
Not only must we simultaneously move up the abstraction level
In a narrative sense. Jung's point would be we better or we'll misuse the normal logical to destroy ourselves
Wouldn't that also be the case if we abstracted up the narrative without also going up the normal logical?
Well, he he he believes he believed that the the problem with the first millennia of christianity was that we did exactly that
Was that we emphasized
spiritual redemption to such a degree
try to reduce
Redemption itself to the spiritual then the world was still crying out because of its
Ontological suffering. It's like well if we're all redeemed by the sacrifice of christ
it's like what's with all the poor and diseased people and that that
Call for the unredeemed material was part of what he saw as the motivational foundation for the
The the systematic investigation say that led to the development of medicine. Yeah. Yeah, so so there was an insufficiency
There was an insufficiency
Maybe it's the insufficiency of getting lost in epistemology if it's just a narrative
It's just a narrative. Well, it's not it has to refer to the world
Okay, so well
That complicates things right because we're part of what we're stuck on here to some degree is
In that ontological realm that's outside any given narrative. There is also a logos
And then the question is is that ontological logos the nature of the world itself
Somehow a narrative and the christian idea to answer that would be
Well, that I don't know because creation is separate
creation
Yeah, speaking on behalf of christian. Yeah, I think christianity makes the claim that the logos is ultimately a person not a narrative
It's not a story. Yeah. Yeah, that's very important. Right. The logo is not an it's not a story
Everything culminates into
Into into the into the person and person literally means originally means hypostasis that which stands under
Yes. Yes. Well, it has to be a person right right
Well, that's why I also said though that it's the description of a structure values is a narrative
So as an embodied ideal christ isn't a story. No, right, but the description of his embodiment
That's a story and the images are a story and the the reason we want the story
Is because the story
Causes us to that to the ethic. That's why we value the stories is right
I would like to see the world the way you see it because you have a whole set of tools that I don't have
And so if you can tell me a story and I can enter into your world
Then that is truly redemptive because the facts now array themselves in a slightly different way
That might be very valuable to me if I run into one of these objects that you described, you know
I'm running an algorithm and something objects. I don't know what to do. What would you do? Tell me
What you did in the similar situation
And so I don't think the story
The story isn't the yeah god that gets so tricky
The the the christian emphasis certainly is is that the embodied reality is the fundamental reality
Yeah, but the story isn't nothing. That's for sure. I'm not saying I know you're not. I know you're not
I'm saying that at all. I was trying to answer jonathan's question, right?
And we're running into the difficulty that I see
Whether or not I'm right or wrong
There's a difficulty. Oh, definitely that's the difficulty. I'm putting my finger on
I'm trying to put my finger on in the meeting. Well, it's also the difficulty that I'm trying to address with this set of propositions
It's definitely a difficulty. Okay, but we got somewhere we got somewhere in that I would say
I think it was very valuable. Okay, so I'm going to skip to number five here every set of values is hierarchical
Otherwise, there's no prioritization
I think we agree on that because we've already agreed that there has to be a prioritization
And there has to be that implies a hierarchy. So the one thing I wanted to ask there
Sorry, I seem to be the the diffusivity. No, no, but it is again
Let's go back to embodied living and then this is actually something you see in narratives
And I would also say that it's something that some of the parables of jesus
Point to because parables. I think mcfag is right parables are narratives that destroy themselves as narrative structures
They're kind of like the way koans destroy themselves as questions
um
And so what I want to say is
Let's say that there is we we seem to have like there's the true the good and the beautiful or we have the narrative the
Nomological and I'll call it the normative in terms of betterment or something like let's say is it the case?
The thing is the hierarchy stable
What I mean by that is you get narratives you get stories get works of art great works of art
In which it looks like they're picking up on something that is true to our embodied experiences
Sometimes we sacrifice the true for the good or the good for the beautiful or the beautiful for the true
Like we seem to be making trade up. We don't seem to have a stable what's on top
We we shift the prioritizations around. There's a lot of great art at least
Proposing that so I think it's a reasonable thing
Right. Well, I think that's partly a consequence of the confusion about what constitutes the unification
so part of the project I have here is that
I'm I'm beginning to view all the narratives that are laid out in the biblical corpus as
They're snapshots of the different idea of what should be at the top. They're like the through line
Well, they're representations of the through line. We still don't know what the through line is so to speak, right?
But there's snapshots so I for example in in the opening lines of genesis
God so we'll say by definition. God is what is at the top. We'll just start with that
And I'm not going to make an ontological claim about that just an epistemological claim
God is what's at the top of your value structure. Okay, so what what should that be?
Well, let's say that's a mystery. Okay, so the bible is an attempt to
To represent that mystery from a variety of different narrative perspectives and so I'll give you a couple of examples
So in the earliest
Chapter the beginning of genesis
God is the word that derives habitable the habitable order that is good out of chaos and potential
Okay, so that whatever god is that's part of it. Okay, so that's that's
And god is a creative force and then then there's the next thing is is
that
God is whatever it is that human beings are made in the image of
That also provides them with a worth that transcends the merely material in some sense because god is outside creation
And if man is made in the image of god, then there's something about man. That's valuable. That's outside of the mirror
materiality. Okay, so that's the next proposition and then
God is rapidly that which forbids and allows so that happens in the garden and then god is
That spirit that you walk with when you're
Unselfconscious and not ashamed
So that's that's the story of adam in the garden and then in noah god is that which
Calls you to batten down the hatches and prepare
When if you're wise in your generations you see that chaos is coming and then in the abrahamic story
God is that which calls you out of the comfort of your family into adventure and so it's like
Who knows what the union of all those things are right because they're they're quite multiplicitous very but but
But I think they're very sophisticated and you might say well is that god it's like well
Do you follow the call of adventure?
Do you take your own intuition seriously when you think that the flood is coming?
The answer to that generally is well you either follow that or you're in trouble people
You sure know that and is god the divine word that generates habitable order
The habitable order that is good out of chaos. Well, do you believe that truth has that power?
so I think
Okay, so these are all ways of pointing to that which might unify the disunity that you see now
You can't boil it down in some way the same way that you boil down beauty
You know, it's it's harder to specify and I think what the bible is attempting to do and and I think this is true of religious writings
of many sorts is to
What is it it's a characterization of this it's first of all
It's an insistence that the thing at the top is a spirit, right? It's not an idea. It's not even like beauty
It's not an abstraction. It's a spirit that can inhabit which is kind of an incarnation idea
So it's it's a spirit that you can embody or that can season possess you
So it's really something that's living
And and so it's not merely an abstract idea and it's not just a normal logical construct
It's something you enact and it's something in principle
You might think well if you're and this leads to the next point any hierarchy that is not unified
Produces confusion anxiety anomy aimlessness and conflict psychological and social. Well, why well?
It's not unified. You don't know your priorities
And if it and if it isn't pointing to something valuable
There's no hope because hope is to be found in
The movement towards something of value
So, okay. Well, sorry. That's a lot. No, no, no, but that's helpful
So let me let me say something and it's not really a pushback
But it's it's sliding over here and if we can make the connection then maybe we can come to an agreement around it
so
right
Adaptivity
Adaptivity is a thing and it's really important and it's not an abstraction
Define it
Adaptivity is the that you are fitted to your environment in a way that allows you
To successfully live long enough to reproduce. Yeah, okay. Okay. So that's kind of an interrated game idea too
You have to live long enough to propagate totally. Yeah, totally. And I'm not here to defend, you know
A gene version or a group selection. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's not that's not what I want. Yeah, okay. So
Adaptivity and you want to you want to you know, how does this?
How does this arise and one of the things you can do is you can say here's all these snapshots of
Adaptivity and what I can do is I can try and find
The what what do they all share in common the capacity to elicit or?
Well, wait a sec. Wait a sec. Wait a sec. So like the problem is right this and this is what you see the
The naturalists before Darwin doing they're trying to find
The shared perfection. Yeah, and then Darwin breaks the mold. He says no, no, no, no, you're making the mistake
There is no
Right, right. There isn't what there is right is some things are adaptive because they're small
Some are adaptive because they're large some are fast some are slow some are hard some are soft
Some are unicellular some are multicellular
Adaptivity doesn't have but what he finds is but there's a universal process
That is right that can explain how all of these different snapshots emerge
But there is there is a perfection and the perfection is being itself. It's the continuation of existence
Okay, but what you just did you've you've played you're not playing with my analogy
You said I can I can meta that and I'm not denying that you can do that John. Okay. I'm trying to use a meta
I don't deny that. Okay. I'm not making that claim. I'm just trying to use this as an analogy and I'm trying to say
Well, it's a powerful objection because certainly the biologists do that
They say well, there's no teleology in evolution
And and and I know that you object to that because you say well, there has to be because you can't even
There's no unity there in any of the organisms and there's certainly no way of perceiving them
But they also have a point which is there's a nomological unity. Even though there's no narrative. That's how they argue
There is a universal process that can be understood scientifically that explains
Adaptivity explain because if you get the theory of evolution, you say right all the organisms should be right
but then you have the problem that
Every organism that survives plays out a pattern which is variation on the horizon of potentiality
And so then you might say well, there is a there is a directionality because if the organism can't
Very creatively on the horizon of potentiality it can't exist or multiply
and so then so so there's a teleology that emerges
Out of the the necessity for survival and reproduction and so and I would say so think about sorry
I gotta get this out
I'll say the abstractions you generate in your prefrontal cortex are
avatars of the process of adaptation to the horizon of the future
and so and so the
Flowering of the human spirit in its highest sense is an embodiment of the process by which the biologists attribute
The the adaptivity it's the process that utilize adaptivity. And so maybe those things dovetail
Well, that's what I'm going to say. So there is a narrative though. No, no
No, that's what there's what I want to challenge you
You gave me a model of the logos that I would say is not narrative except for a trivial definition of narrative
Which is variation and selection
look
Instead look let's put it back in the psychological. It's like with humans
It's the willingness to do that though
So it's not just the fact that it can can happen and does happen
And that's partly what brings in the narrative element is you do not have to abide by that like you you that can happen to you
You can you can have this creative variation and this selection in relationship to
Adaptivity let's say to keep it biological
But you can you do not have to do that
And so I think it's the struggle with that that constitutes the narrative
I want to push back on you on that
Okay, I think there's all kinds of stuff
At the relevance realization doing that variation and selection that you cannot
Exercise authority over because your authority actually depends on on the right
So it's different than the level at which you have narrative access to your own being
And look I think that that's related to Jonathan's objection earlier
That the law is inscribed on the human heart. It's like yes, I agree, but but
Let me say if I claim that
human evolution
builds a material embodiment that strives towards manifestation of the logos and then there's an abstraction
And and that meets in the middle
The fact that you can't control all the manifestations of your
Prioritization structure doesn't mean the logos isn't built into the a priori systems that structure that perception for you
I'm not denying that what I'm denying is that that logos is ultimately operating as a narrative
I think the low and look at look at look at even look at even psychologically
Narrative doesn't emerge until a certain age and it is pre it depends on dia logos
It depends on dialogue. It depends on joint attention
It depends on the ability to take turns in conversation
You have to have all this dialogical machinery in place before narrative is possible, right?
Well the way I would object to that fine. That's a perfectly reasonable objection
but the problem with that is is that a lot of that scaffolded by
quasi narrative precursors
So for example, one of the things you do with a baby before it can engage in in the dialogue is
verb mediated semantically is you do a dance like play
And the spirit of the logos is and I would say a narrative spirit is deeply embodied in that because if that isn't taking
Place within the spirit of love and play and truth
Then it isn't going to give rise to the capacity later for the dialogos
So that's kind of the embeddement in some sense of the embeddement
embeddement
Embedding there's the word of the logos in the material right prior to its manifestation
And I do think in some sense that's not a story, you know, because if you watch a wolf pack
What they're doing isn't a story, but if you describe it it becomes a story
Yes, right. So there is an embodied pattern. That's not a story
But I think we're agreeing now that
Okay, okay. Okay. Well, there
There's a lot of so I guess we go back to where you said the description of a structure of that's right
I said the description is a story
Now that doesn't mean that the description doesn't match the underlying behavioral pattern
You know, I think one of the things I
sort of thought through and maps of meaning with the moses story is
Well, why why those laws?
So you see in the story, it's so bloody cool before moses goes up to the mountain
He spends
Decades we don't know forever
morning tonight
Judging objections. So the Israelites are out in the desert
There's no structure and they fight with each other all the time and then they come to moses and say well, we're fighting
What do we do about it?
And he like judges them and his father-in-law actually says to him you have to stop doing this because it is absolutely
Exhausting you and it isn't till after that that so then you think what's he doing?
We're seeing all these micro narratives, right?
And then he has to discriminate between them, which means he's turning them into a hierarchy of value because that's what the discrimination is
This is what's right in this conflict. So conflict
Hierarchy and then he's doing that just constantly so you can imagine that within him
this
Hierarchy of value is starting to be built explicitly then he goes up on the mountain and it's like bang. Oh
This is
What all our striving is oriented to and then he comes down the first time it doesn't map as you said the second time it maps
So the the deliverance of the message from on high has to map on to this and some of this
Conflict and its agreement would emerge from biological acceptability because the people would say oh
I feel as though that was just it solves the problem
And so the the materials in communication then with the abstraction. I think I think we're close to agreement. I guess
To circle back
I don't I don't sort of deny that I don't I'm really not denying that narrative is a powerful way for disclosing
intelligibility
And the logos
Right, what I'm saying is is it there's a privileging of it here that I'm okay. So is it okay?
So is it important? Is it important?
Is the distinction that I just made between
an embodied pattern
and a narrative enough to
Dispense with your with your objection or is there more to it? Well, let me let me let me see
Because I think that theories and poems and music things that I'm treating as non narrative
Can disclose depths of reality that I can't disclose with the story
Okay, so why is it? Why is it important to you or necessary to make that distinction?
Do you think? Well, why is out of curiosity? Well, it's important for me is that
I'm concerned about
a privileging of narrative
All used to be an inappropriate privileging of narrative border on idolatry, right?
In that we are well, that's kind of what the postmodernists do
So there's definitely a danger there, right? If you overprivilege narrative to the point where the ontology itself disappears
I think what's the honest thing is that he's afraid that if we embody if we embrace a narrative
Then the solution to the meaning crisis won't be universal enough
Is that something that's so that's a practical implication because
I I would propose to you
It's a proposal
Okay
That whatever is going to resolve the meaning crisis has to reintegrate science and spirituality
If it does not do that, right? Well, so that's partly also what you're insisting on is that there is this domain of scientific knowledge
That should be regarded as in some sense independent of narrative and that's I'm still having a very much trouble with that because we still have the problem of
If then, right? It's like
But and I don't see how we escape escape from that
But that's where I push on back on the trivialization if if then constitutes a narrative
No, no, it doesn't okay if
Constitutes a narrative if yeah if does because if has to be well if we want to cure disease if we want to
So Jung believed that the spirit of science grew out of the alchemical fantasy
And so the alchemical fantasy was we will find in material
this solution to
ill health death and
privation
Well, yeah ill health death and privation. That's exactly it. And so Jung's point was without that
Impulse which he regarded as a compensation to the hyper
Spiritualization that Christianity imposed in the world in the first Christian ion without that fantasy deeply like deeply embodied
Manifesting itself out of embodied behavior and then out of image
We wouldn't have been because Jung said well
How do you get someone to look down a microscope at an amoeba for 10 hours?
Because like no animal will do that and his notion was well
We had to be gripped by something of a dream of intense motivational significance
And it was the dream that redemption could be found in analysis of the transformations of the material world
right, but like but
The the the motivating the motivating structure
Is not the same thing as the reference of of what i'm talking about right right right right
So i might be narrative to do science
But we don't want to make the genetic fallacy that that means that everything that science is referring to
Is a narrative, right? Yeah, right the fact right right that that'd be like
That's like saying everything i talk about i have to speak in english
So reality is made of english that does bring us to the postmodern conundrum because they would insist that know all the
Sets of all the facts that science derives are in some simple sense a narrative right?
And then that narrative is associated with the drive to power and domination
And so yeah, we do have to be careful that because we'll fall right into that trap right so that that that's what so if you
Want to comment no, but i can i say this?
I I I I do think that a great manner in which modern
science got developed who does
Is I think it is narrative that is there is
On the one hand the desire to deliver and but on the other hand the desire to dominate is there right
We've talked about this before with bacon. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and I don't deny that
Yeah
And so there is it there is and so it doesn't take away the but the same motivation can drive people in doing mathematics
Yeah, right at the same motivation can drive people doing music
So we don't want to say that's the essence of science or music or mathematics because then we're doing we're removing the important differences
You're afraid that we're collapsing everything. Yes, but I think yeah, I think that it's mostly about high
it's about hierarchy in in the sense of
In the sense that because we are embodied beings that are living
That are living in the world that are living lives and all that we do all that we care about
Is part of that reality?
And so even the nomological order, although I think I I agree with you now
It's definitely not a narrative, but it is embedded. That's why Jordan used it
The expression embedded in narrative
Yes, that is that it has to but isn't the reverse the case narrative depends on
The presupposition that there is an ordered world in which it can take place
Right, but that the question is then is that logos that constitutes the order so to speak
If when you represent that do you necessarily represent it as a narrative? And this is a deep question
I mean, I'm proposing to you that the logos is that which
Which
Allows the narrative order and the nomological order to unite to what they're doing. That's what I'm saying, right?
Okay, but that's fine. I but then I might wonder does it extend
Does it extend to the narrative order and to the underlying on ontological order as well?
The logos is both in the story and in the logic
That's we think about just even follow the history of the word logos and watch how it goes in these two different directions
With good reason
Yeah, yeah, well, so okay, so
Then then the question so you're objecting that the logos isn't a story and and that's so strange and so weird because
We could say that what the west is kind of split on that because in some sense
If you if you think of the development of the idea of the logos from the greek and enlightenment side the answer would be
There there's no
Immediate insistence there that it's a narrative. That's right on the Judeo-christian side
There's a pronounced insistence that it's a narrative. Yes, and our modern culture is actually a union of those two, right?
Just described a couple episodes of the awakening for the meaning crisis. That's exactly the argument
I try to trace out
And well, and certainly the argument we're having right now because
Jonathan and I in some sense are making a case where the logo says narrative and embody narrative
Although you also point to the importance of embodiment. I'm not rejecting. I know. I know. I know while it's very difficult to differentiate
That's right. Yes, and I do like the idea that there's a hierarchy of narrative with the ideal at the top and then a hierarchy of
Nomological description and that there's a correspondence between the hierarchies because it does seem to me that
And I want to puzzle that out one of the things Jung warned about
he thought there was an ethos in
The religious story and to some degree in the alchemical story and then when the
Scientific revolution hit we blew up the normal logical
Into this massively powerful thing
But our ethic was left in the same primitive form. So now we're in danger because of that
I think I think that's exactly right. I think one of one of I talk about this in terms of propositional
tyranny and algorithmic tyranny right and what we've done is we've reduced
The logos inappropriately to logic. I strongly resist that move too, right? So you're okay. Okay. Okay. Well, I get I get your caution because I do believe that
Devolving everything down to the narrative per se does put us in the postmodern trap
Which is what's all
In some sense. Well, it's all narrative which is kind of what they claimed
And that's a problem because then you can dispense with the with the corrective reality. Exactly. Exactly
So I I I use a stereoscopic metaphor. I think of the logos as
Like as epitomized in logic as in story and then I try to look through both to a depth
That's what I try to think of as the logo school. Sorry. Tell me that again
So, you know how I have the left and right visual field and then I look through them to depth perception. Yeah
Here's logos as logic
There's logos as story and I try to look through them to the depth behind
Yeah, yeah, that's well that seems on the face of it quite fine
I mean, I'm still in a conundrum because
We already agreed that the selection of the facts and even the manifestation of the facts as perceptual objects is dependent
On the imposition of a hierarchy value
And so that tangles the damn narrative into it again, but so but
But there's something that's key to the idea of parallel hierarchies that I think is is
A conceptual way out of this and that's one of the key moves in neoplatonism
Exactly what you're puzzling over. How do these things?
What explains their parallel and what explains beyond the parable parallel what I was trying to do with the
Derascopic what what explains their convergence? Okay, okay, what if
What if it is something like
Let's say I'm using the word person, but let's use the word consciousness
Okay, right or so that that that so it's a maximus has this is why I like to maximum so much right because say maximus
He has he has exactly what you're talking about in terms of this non-melodic order. This is hierarchy of order
And he has a sense in which the laboratory for that is man, right man with a capital M
And so doesn't it doesn't it kind of one of the solutions to this?
When it be the this relevant realization that you're talking about but the relevant realization happens
Ultimately happens in in consciousness or something like consciousness or I mean, I I think it happens in intelligence
Because we have a lot of relevance realization going on below consciousness. Okay, and I've talked about this right, okay
I think consciousness is a kind of intelligence for specific kinds of problems. It'll define normal novel. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
Yeah, that's the horizon unpredictable horizon of the future, right, right, right, right, so
But let's say and and I think the issue is yes
And and what I'm here what I'm sort of proposing is
intelligibility is something like the way
Reality is realizing itself and relevance realization is intelligence
And the good is the fact that we we trust that the
The intelligence can track the intelligibility and by doing that it puts us in touch with the world
That's what I was is that a is that a presupposition of faith?
Is that a presupposition of the faith that was necessary before the manifestation of a real science?
Yes, the willingness to act on that basis. I think if you do not
Okay, so I'm not going to I'm not going to deny the importance of the judeo christian story
Okay, but I would also say that without fedo's argument about the good
As the ongoing fulfillment of the promise that intelligibility tracks realness
You can't do science and there's a reason why the scientific revolution is a return to play-doh
Galileo rejects Aristotle and goes to play-doh and says play-doh is right
Mathematics listen to the words mathematics is the language of reality. There's no math in Aristotelian science for 1200 years
It turns to play-doh
And that's what brings in the core of why why is that a turn to play-doh particularly? It's because play-doh
Like really in the republic play-doh makes the argument that
Mathem you he had it over the academy
You can't come into the academy unless you can do mathematics because until you do mathematics
You can't grasp the kind of intelligibility needed to get at the deepest realities of things and science
So you said the math was the cardinal example of that. Yes
And all of our science is dependent on math and his his attitude towards myth and narrative is
Right
That's how to claim about science. Yeah, is that myths and narratives are right that they are indispensable
But they do not have the same degree of
Revelation of the promise of the good okay that math does i'm not saying i'm agreeing with that
Isn't that why also neoplatonism?
Could never land right he could never land and become
A mode of being for a society
It's it's it that's why we've talked about this before a little bit where
What christianity does is it provides the body
for that which was good of
Of the neoplaton platonic tradition and it provides something more to be to be embodied in a
In a communion of love and a communion of participation see what what you can't get in neoplatonism
And and and although i'm not a christian i prefer christian neoplatonism over pagan neoplatonism because
Plato is striving towards the agape and christianity makes this astonishing the two identity claims
Both made by john god is the logos and god is agape right and and then that's an identity claim between
logos and agape
Right it's not to say they're the same, but it's also sustained right
And you're gonna say the trinity and i get that right that's fine and i don't object to that
But the point i'm making is for me. That's the crucial move
Here's what i say in response to that
And this is what i mean when i say about neoplatonism is the interesting that you would use the word crucial
Yeah, no i think it is i think it is because i go back to my point
You can't follow the logos unless agape takes you out of egocentrism
Right right i that's right. Yeah, okay, but also agape can't unfold to you unless there's an order and an intelligibility to it
It makes no sense to say i love something. Yeah, and there's no intelligibility to it. That doesn't make any sense
Right. Yeah, okay
Now but you see the thing is and and this is what i when i'm trying to get at with my idea of the intellectual silk road
Right that neop, right now our culture the hermetic suspicion were locked into the courtroom of debate
I propose that we go back and do what we had with the silk road
Which is the courtyard of discussion neoplatonism has this terrific ability to enter into reciprocal reconstruction
With christianity clearly it does it with islam, which is what we're doing right now
Yes, but it does it with islam and that's how you get suphism
It does it with science you if you take a look
Read john spencer's book the eternal law you look at what's happening around ironside in that
They're all invoking neoplatonic or similar ideas to neoplatonism
Neoplatonism at with galalao it's capable of entering into reciprocal reconstruction with science with islam with christianity
There seems to be evidence that it can do this with buddhism
Taoism that's what thomas plant is arguing was happening on the silk road
so
What you see as a potential defect i see is a benefit which is it doesn't
It doesn't land because it's designed to land in many different ways and allow people
Okay, so that's very much related to this idea of apparel a harky if you're abstracting out
The set of universal facts then those facts are useful in relationship to
The higher order narratives that unite narratives
What that's that's exactly. I think that's the claim you just made I I think so let me let me see
So what i'm saying is that neoplatonism gets us gives us a way to dispose the furniture of thought
That we can come into deep dialogue and it would allow a sufi
And it would allow
You know a christian to have deep discussion. They don't have to agree
The the silk road wasn't dependent on one person running the silk road
It was dependent on the fact that all of these civilizations found a way to deeply talk to each other
Why the silk road metaphor i'm not i'm too historically
I know what the silk road was but why why use that because the silk road binds the east and the west together
Right, it's like the golden thread. Yes. It's it's the through line between civilizations
Literally, but not just the physical road. There is a philosophical silk road and thomas plant by the way
Who is a christian argues that that was neoplatonism?
So I think I think in one deep sense
Well, there's certainly it certainly is the case that to some degree
If science is a derivation of neoplatonism in the way that you described
science has also been
A uniting methodology and system of apprehension because many different cultures
Are willing
With different degrees of ability to utilize the scientific method
I I agree and I would say that's ultimately exactly for the reasons you just gave
Gave because science has has
Has sort of made implicit within itself many neoplatonic moves
I mean, I think it's interesting. I would say I mean it doesn't bother me so much in the sense that
To the extent that that which do play is and present as true
I don't have that much of a problem when I read saying maximus. I don't even ask myself
You played play doesn't was this Christianity and I'm not saying you should yeah
What I'm what I'm saying is and when I read a Sufi, I don't ask myself that question either
Like if I read ibn Arabi, I would say yeah, he's saying some pretty powerful true things
You know and I can also recognize the the place to which we disagree
But he says some definitely powerful things about the nature of reality, which are the
Think about the imaginal without ibn Arabi. You won't get it
And and if you want to turn to some very good places to talk about agopic love read sufi read some of the sufi
you want right like
I I want to
So you're you're emphasizing this in large part because or I don't want to put words in your mouth
But because you also see
See, I think the belief in the logos is a precondition for dialogue, right? Yes, but you're making a case for
In some sense, it's not a binary definition of logos. It's one that's informed
Perhaps properly in equal parts from the tradition of
Greece and the it's dipolar. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, but there's but there's also
There's no reason to assume that there isn't a deeper unity that
That both are pointing to
I mean, we've been acting out that presupposition in some sense in the west since
Since the time of the Renaissance because that was
Rome and Greece meeting
Jerusalem in a real sense
Rome sorry Roman Athens say meeting Jerusalem in a real sense, but it was true way before that
I mean that one of the precursors to the Renaissance is the the intellectual reality of Constantinople like new Platonism was just
Present was present there the whole time. It just was there
And so we know we don't know much about it because the city was destroyed and everything got scattered
but the the the
Let's say the tradition new Platonism the man in which the one of the important matters in which it reached the west was was through these
these
Christian scholars that got chased away from the city basically because it was in danger and brought the the text and the tradition to
And then there's another and then there's the way it comes from the Arab world too
There's sort of multiple time. See what I'm trying to do what I'm proposing is I'm trying to do
I'm starting to do like a historical thing where I'm trying to look at all of the ways in which it's like the glass
We can get the multi-espectuality of neoplatonism by seeing all the ways it was able to re
reciprocally reconstructed itself
Like reciprocally reconstruct with with christ with Aristotle or with Christianity or with science or with
So you're taking snapshots of that in some sense in the same way
I'm trying to do that with the notion of right at the top in the narrative sense using the biblical corpus
Exactly and I'm trying to find the through line
The historical through line for neoplatonism because I don't this is maybe where Jonathan and I disagree
But I think we do it in at least a loving manner
Well, or don't understand each other fully. It's possible. It's possible. But what I'm what I guess what I wanted to state is
Your metagame
Me participating in the dialogue is more important to me than
Continuing the right relationship is more valuable to me than coming to the right right. Definitely. Okay. Definitely. So I just wanted to state
Oh, yeah. Well, that's a good place to end. I think I mean we've got a long ways through this
um
We'll try to figure out perhaps
After we think about this for a good while what we might do to continue it because there's a few
Propositions here that I think are relevant. I just might share them with people that we didn't get to
Any hierarchy that is unified is made so by the dominion of a superordinate principle
So something has to bring everything together and has to be at the top to unite
That principle is most effectively what is common to all that is deemed of comparative relative value within the hierarchy
So we talked about the commonality between the good the beautiful and the true
the common principle of value
Must necessarily be elevated to the highest place in the hierarchy. Well, that's the abstraction of the good
Maybe it wouldn't matter if it was neoplatonic or the more Christian notion of the logos and then
This is something that you really influenced me in relationship that bringing to the highest place is
Personal subordination. So that's above me and I serve it
Imitation I want to become that faith. I believe that that principle prevails
Which is it's worthy of what would you say?
If there's joy in relationship to the recognition of its superordinate place
Adulation a variant of that in worship, which is sort of maybe
A worship is what combines all of those and so those are propositions
Which I would like to impact with you guys and then there's something that's more specifically
Judeo-Christian after that, which I won't get into now because I think it would be a distraction
so
well
That's a that's great conversation. I'll come to try on any time for this. Yeah, okay. Well, I think we should we should
think about
Doing it again. Well, we'll start halfway through and see if we get to the end. I think that would be very good
Yeah, well, it's really really see a lot of what we're doing is
We're differentiating the propositions, right? It's like well, here's here's the proposition
Here's its complexity and there's some real utility and just
In just seeing the full complexity
walking through it
I mean, this is also
Right. This is also I think a genuine active fellowship or even friendship because
Um, do you the more you do that the more responsive you can make your argument to people who want to engage with it? Of course, of course
that's exactly. Well, I mean, we're trying to get to
A diverse range of tools that are grounded on something as rock-solid as we can manage. Yeah, so yeah
Thanks for writing us. I don't need to have sightings of suspicion. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. That was that was hey
My pleasure, man. I'm so glad you guys could come and that we could be together finally
In person and I think the conversation was a lot more dynamic and deeper than we would have managed
On zoom total. Yeah, I totally agree with that. Yeah, I totally agree
All right, great. Thanks, Eric
Thank you for all all you who are watching and listening and more to follow on many fronts with any luck